[Amit Varma]: Given what cricket means for so many Indians, it's tempting to draw parallels between the
[Amit Varma]: story of cricket and the story of India. In some ways, cricket reflects how Indian society
[Amit Varma]: has changed over the last few decades. We started out uncertain of our place in the
[Amit Varma]: world, trying to find our feet, hobbled by an inferiority complex, looking for pride
[Amit Varma]: in small constellations, but eventually opening up to the world and asserting ourselves. But
[Amit Varma]: this comparison only goes so far. Our cricket has flourished to a point where India dominates
[Amit Varma]: this game, especially in a commercial sense. In some ways, it also embodies the best of
[Amit Varma]: what this country can be. It is inclusive of players from the remotest parts and showcases
[Amit Varma]: a healthy way to love your nation. I contrast that with the state of the nation today, where
[Amit Varma]: our economy is in a precarious place, our society is facing so many different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of ruptures, our politics has become so polarizing and toxic. George Orwell once spoke of sport
[Amit Varma]: as war minus the shooting. He was alluding to the ugly tribal instincts that sport can
[Amit Varma]: bring out. But cricket, it seems to me, has evolved to a place where it can sometimes
[Amit Varma]: take us beyond that tribal place. If that's so, then that's one more thing to love about
[Unknown]: Indian cricket. And there's a lot to love about it.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Ayaz Memon, cricket journalist for
[Amit Varma]: 42 years now, and indeed such a legend of cricket journalism that his Twitter handle
[Amit Varma]: at Cricketwala is basically how he is known. Ayaz is the editor of a superb new anthology
[Amit Varma]: called Indian Innings, the journey of Indian cricket since 1947. The book has selections
[Amit Varma]: from over 60 writers spanning the decades since independence and captures many of the
[Amit Varma]: fine milestones and characters of the game. In some ways, it's not just about the journey
[Amit Varma]: of cricket, but also the journey of cricket writing. I'm honored to have a couple of pieces
[Amit Varma]: in this anthology, and the rest of the writers constitute a who's who of Indian cricket writing.
[Amit Varma]: It's a fabulous book to sit back with and get a sense of the rich history of this fine
[Amit Varma]: game, which, as Ashish Nandy once said, is quote, an Indian game invented by the English,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. But I didn't just talk to Ayaz about cricket. He has also been a major figure
[Amit Varma]: of Indian journalism as the editor of Midday in the 90s, and later an editor with the Times
[Amit Varma]: of India and DNA. He's been a stalwart in the industry. So we spoke about cricket and
[Amit Varma]: journalism about India about this and that my podcast tend to be like a test match. So
[Amit Varma]: sit back and enjoy. But before we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way, a couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ compounds at ctq compounds.com, which aims to help people up
[Amit Varma]: level themselves by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of the programs called
[Amit Varma]: the daily reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read the
[Amit Varma]: subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading at the end of every day, I understood the world
[Amit Varma]: a little better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to CTQ compounds and check out their daily reader. New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called future stack, which helps you stay up to date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future
[Amit Varma]: stack batches start every Saturday. Also check out their social capital compound, which helps
[Amit Varma]: you master social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees 2500
[Amit Varma]: if you use the discount code unseen. So head on over to CTQ compounds at ctq compounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code unseen up level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you so much, Amit. Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: When one speaks to you, there's so much to talk about. Because you've covered Indian
[Amit Varma]: cricket for you know, more than 40 years now. And plus beyond all of that, I don't just
[Amit Varma]: want to talk to you about cricket because obviously, you've been a prominent journalist,
[Amit Varma]: you've been editor of midday and all of that. And I'd be interested in hearing about your
[Amit Varma]: thoughts on the evolution of journalism as well. But before that, take me back to your
[Amit Varma]: childhood. You were born in the mid 50s. So tell me about what growing up there was like
[Amit Varma]: because one often hears this thing about India and as an 80s kid, I also know this to be
[Amit Varma]: true that I was born in the 70s. But kind of my memories are from the 80s where that
[Amit Varma]: old cliche about India is kind of true in the sense that you just had cricket in Bollywood,
[Amit Varma]: there was no other way to entertain yourself. And if you were growing up, you couldn't help
[Amit Varma]: but be attracted to one of those things. And you are of course, a legend of cricket journalism,
[Amit Varma]: but more than that, also a cricket lover as is apparent in every word that you speak.
[Amit Varma]: So how did this love affair start?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, look, you're right. I mean, cricket and cinema were the abiding passions.
[Guest]: But in my house, there was no cinema because my father was quite opposed to movies. He
[Guest]: was a lawyer. And my mother told me subsequently, after my father died, that he actually was
[Guest]: very interested in cinema up to a point. And then whatever happened, he just switched off
[Guest]: cinema. I think his favorites used to be Kundan Lal Saigal and you know, all that that generation.
[Guest]: But cricket was an obsession even with him. And since I was, you know, a late, late child,
[Guest]: I was born after 17 years. So the way I was pampered was my mother, my father was a lawyer,
[Guest]: so he would be at work through the week and come home rather late. So my mother would
[Guest]: sneak off to the cinema with her friends in as much as was possible in the very conservative
[Guest]: society and tag me along. So I saw some movies in radio talkies near Crawford Market. And
[Guest]: you know, some of them were really the real tear jerkers, as you call them. And then you
[Guest]: would see my mother's weeping, her friends are weeping. And I would wonder as a child
[Guest]: what the hell is happening. But the other thing which was happening in my life was that
[Guest]: I was getting a cricket bat or a cricket ball as a gift from my father. And then I think
[Guest]: in many ways, the turning point for me was getting a copy of Wisden. We used to have
[Guest]: a house in Lonavala. My father used to take us there and meet him at the railway station.
[Guest]: He would come by the Deccan Queen, which is an iconic train service, as we know. And,
[Guest]: you know, one day he walked out of the compartment and he had this, it looked like a brick or
[Guest]: a couple of bricks that he was holding in his hand. He said, hey, this is for you. You
[Guest]: know, and I, I was maybe seven or something like that. And I said, this is just too big
[Guest]: for me to handle, you know. And I went back, we went back home and I started reading those
[Guest]: pages. And that's where I got my first feel of reading about cricket, you know. And because
[Guest]: we had a small little porch in front of the little garden, in his pyjamas, my father would
[Guest]: bowl to me and I would be batting or the other way around. And that's when, that's when I
[Guest]: started getting initiated into cricket. And he was such an avid follower that there was
[Guest]: a match between Australia and some other country. And I remember it was England, I think, 62-63.
[Guest]: He would wake up early in the morning to catch the commentary on Radio Australia. And I started
[Guest]: waking up and listening to the commentary. And that's when this kind of appreciation
[Guest]: and also this love for cricket started growing. And then once I got that, that copy of Wisden,
[Guest]: I started exploring it further because you can't finish Wisden in one quick read. You
[Guest]: have to keep diving into it and you find something new and something more marvellous and something
[Guest]: more remarkable. And I think one thing which absolutely fascinated me, troubled me for
[Guest]: a while, was my father posed three questions to me. I remember this very distinctly when
[Guest]: we were in Lonavala. He said, okay, so now you're fond of cricket and all that. So whose
[Guest]: batting average is 99.94? Who's taken 19 wickets in a test match? And then there was the third
[Guest]: question. He said, who made a triple century and never played a match again, a test match
[Guest]: again? So the first two, I found rather easily in many ways, because you went to the highest
[Guest]: averages, you found Don Bradman 99.94 and Jim Laker 19 wickets in a test match. And
[Guest]: I got completely bamboozled by the third one, which is Andrew Sandham, which is Andrew Sandham.
[Guest]: And I went back and forth and I said, triple century and not played again. And then, you
[Guest]: know, by a process of elimination, you found out who made the triple centuries. And Andrew
[Guest]: Sandham was a guy who in 1929-30, he played a timeless test match. This came in a timeless
[Guest]: test. He actually made a half century also in that match and never played again because
[Guest]: he was 39-40 by that time. So, you know, just discovering Andrew Sandham's name was such
[Guest]: a high for me that I couldn't get over it for many, many days. It was almost like, you
[Guest]: know, I played a game of chess or he had played a game of chess with me and I'd checkmated
[Guest]: him. I found the answer. I went and told him. And of course, he was delighted. But these
[Guest]: were the early years. And I think that the turning point was watching India beat Australia
[Guest]: at the Bebon Stadium. Bobby Simpson's team versus Nawab of Pathodi's India. And somebody,
[Guest]: some relative of mine had some tickets for the Islam Jim Khanna stands. I didn't see
[Guest]: the first two days. We saw the last three days of the match. And it was a cliffhanger.
[Guest]: The match went into, you know, I mean, it was like edge of the seat excitement. Narrowly
[Guest]: India won. Chandu Bode and Indrajeet Singh, the wicketkeeper, who I got to know very well
[Guest]: later. Both of them, Bode and Indrajeet Singh. Chandu Bode, I think, made 33 and took India
[Guest]: to victory. And there, there was an eruption when India hit the winning runs with Bode.
[Guest]: And people jumped over. There was not too much security then. Everybody jumped onto
[Guest]: the ground and ran towards the CCI pavilion. And then after a while, everybody's shouting
[Guest]: slogans and, you know, waiting for the team to greet their heroes. And then Pathodi comes
[Guest]: out on the balcony along with Chandrashekhar and Bode and some of the others. And that
[Guest]: was the most decisive moment for me, I think. You know, I just got completely hooked to
[Guest]: cricket.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just thinking back on my own childhood, for example, like if you ask a young person
[Amit Varma]: today, when did you fall in love with cricket? Their memory will be visual. They would have
[Amit Varma]: probably seen something on television, some great innings, some World Cup final, and that
[Amit Varma]: is a moment and all of that. And for us, in the pre-TV days, those visuals kind of weren't
[Amit Varma]: there. Like I remember when I was a kid, my dad had once given me this book, not the Wizard
[Amit Varma]: Cricketer's Almanac, as you mentioned, which I had the great pride of writing for in the
[Amit Varma]: early 2000s. So that was like something that you looked up to in the childhood actually
[Amit Varma]: happening. But this Wizard Book of Test Cricket, which was published in 1977 and had every
[Amit Varma]: scorecard until then, and all the records and everything. And I remember going through
[Amit Varma]: it and I practically knew every scorecard by heart. And of course, there weren't so
[Amit Varma]: many tests played until then. And what was so delightful about that was that we were
[Amit Varma]: making stories in our heads. Yes, about all these characters, like you, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: brought up Andrew Sandham, I remembered Ari Foster, who made 287 on debut, right, and
[Amit Varma]: never made 100 again. And I realized that many of these memories from my childhood are
[Amit Varma]: very vivid for me, like as a growing up fan, I knew every triple century, right? Right.
[Amit Varma]: And whenever somebody would reach sort of a triple 100, you'd kind of start counting
[Amit Varma]: that person down that, oh, okay, 310 is Edric, 311 is Simpson, then 334, 336 is Hammond,
[Amit Varma]: 334, of course, Bradman, and so on. And right up to adulthood, like many Indians have scored
[Amit Varma]: more than 236 not out today, but that is still sort of an iconic figure because that for
[Amit Varma]: many, many years, that was a high score by an Indian, which of course, Gavaskar had.
[Guest]: Also getting past Bradman. And getting, you know, 30th century. So 30th century. So you
[Amit Varma]: can. So do you also feel that because one of the things that people say about memory
[Amit Varma]: is that when you kind of get on in years, as to some extent, both of us are, what you
[Amit Varma]: remember really vividly, the other bookends, a lot of the middle becomes kind of mushy,
[Amit Varma]: and you kind of forget that. But you remember those early childhood memories very vividly.
[Amit Varma]: And you remember what just happened yesterday. But a lot of stuff in between is kind of just
[Amit Varma]: a blur. And I remember that struck me with a tinge of sadness because my dad before he
[Amit Varma]: passed away earlier this year, I think last year, I sat down with him and I said, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I just took a recorder and I said, Okay, I have all this audio equipment, let me talk
[Amit Varma]: to you about your memories. And he remembered his childhood and his youth incredibly vividly.
[Amit Varma]: And then at one point, and he was suffering from Parkinson's as we later found. And at
[Amit Varma]: one point, he turned to me and he said that I don't remember you as the child. I don't
[Amit Varma]: remember anything of the years you grew up. So tell me a little bit about that, which
[Amit Varma]: is just an aside, I thought I'll throw out there because I'm very fascinated by the way
[Amit Varma]: that memory works. And the fact that you and I can remember, you know, I'm sure entire
[Amit Varma]: scorecards from our childhood, but perhaps not something that we covered in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of our journalistic years. Is that sort of true? Do you remember?
[Guest]: No, I mean, it's true. So there are two things that I can, you know, say that has happened.
[Guest]: I'm not a psychoanalyst in that sense. So I can only talk about myself. One is that
[Guest]: when I started following cricket, there was not enough visual experience to go by. There
[Guest]: was no television in my house till at least the late 70s, actually, if I remember and
[Guest]: that was a black and white to camera. And there was not too many pictures in newspapers.
[Guest]: The magazine Sportsweek, at least in Mumbai or Bombay started in 1968. There was sports
[Guest]: and pastime, sport and pastime coming from Chennai, which one didn't get regularly. We
[Guest]: were not subscribing to it. And, you know, Chennai was a long way away from Bombay in
[Guest]: those days. So you dived into these books or newspaper reports, and you actually created
[Guest]: a visual experience for yourself. So, you know, if you read about Sir Garfield Sobers
[Guest]: hitting Malcolm Nash for six sixes and over, now, you know, you can see it on YouTube.
[Guest]: But when it actually happened, one can only one could only imagine it and visualize as
[Guest]: you imagine it. And therefore, those memories actually struck quite was quite vivid for
[Guest]: me, you know, some of may have some of them may have been exaggerated, a little flawed,
[Guest]: but they stuck and therefore also the scorecards and the descriptions around it stuck, you
[Guest]: know, so, Tiger Pataudi batting on one leg in Australia in 1967, you know, already with
[Guest]: one eye already with one eye back in one leg because he was injured. And, you know, just
[Guest]: the description and you what you read and what you heard on radio had very powerful
[Guest]: impact. And now, what is because there's such a profusion of action that one can see, and
[Guest]: it comes to you from all sources, it can come to you on your mobile phone, it's obviously
[Guest]: there on your television, it's there in the archival material, if you want to access it,
[Guest]: you can see just about anything. So you can seek out what you missed. And it is there
[Guest]: and try and match it. But there's also so much of it that what you've actually seen,
[Guest]: you tend to lose sight of, or you tend to forget. You know, it's been 13 years since
[Guest]: the IPL has been played. If you ask me which knock or innings that I remember, the only
[Guest]: one which I remember the first one which I saw was Brendan McCallum making 158 in the
[Guest]: first match when the tournament just took off. But if you ask me some of the other terrific
[Guest]: knocks played by AB de Villiers or Virat Kohli or Rohit Sharma, I'm hazy. I don't know. Test
[Guest]: matches, I would be far more, you know, it's far stronger, the impact. I remember distinctly
[Guest]: Sachin Tendulkar's first innings, you know, in Karachi. But that was also because it was
[Guest]: such a momentous event, you know, a 16 year old getting into the Indian team, first rivals
[Guest]: is Pakistan, the match is at Karachi and, you know, he doesn't make too many runs. Then
[Guest]: of course, as the series progresses, he played in the last test, he gets hit on the face
[Guest]: by Vakar Younis, stands up and hits a boundary. Then we go to Peshawar and then he's hitting
[Guest]: those sixes of Abdul Qadir. By the time that tour ends, Tendulkar is a household name across
[Guest]: the world. So those memories are very distinct, but there are so many others. I can't remember
[Guest]: too much of the other players. Tendulkar, I can remember because it seemed to me just
[Guest]: so much more significant in that particular series. And likewise, I mean, Gavaskar's last
[Guest]: innings of his test career, 96 at Bangalore, it's almost as if I can remember every delivery.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, you know, speaking broadly for the manner in which he played on that
[Guest]: minefield of a pitch, you know, when Tausif Ahmed was bowling to him and the ball was
[Guest]: breaking off the pitch and bouncing, and this guy would just kind of, you know, move outside
[Guest]: the line of the ball, move to the offside, let the ball pass. If you look at the scorecard,
[Guest]: I think there are a fair number of buys there, because the wicketkeeper couldn't judge the
[Guest]: bounce or the spin as well as Gavaskar could. Of course, he was also obscured by Gavaskar.
[Guest]: But I'm just saying that the mastery of Gavaskar in that innings is something that I can't,
[Guest]: you know, it doesn't get erased. It's not got erased from my mind. Or Kapil Dev's catch
[Guest]: in the World Cup or his 175, which, you know, I was privileged to see live.
[Amit Varma]: We'll kind of talk about all of that. And these are, again, seminal moments. And in
[Amit Varma]: Sachin's case, there's a backstory because you had actually seen him before that. I think
[Amit Varma]: you'd mentioned once that Dilip Engsarkar had called you and said, come with me and
[Guest]: see this boy.
[Guest]: Yes, Dilip Engsarkar was the captain of India. And, you know, our office was in Tardeo, the
[Guest]: Sportsweek office. And Dilip used to live at, in those days, I think, he had, I think,
[Guest]: moved to Worli, you know, in Sportsfield building. And he said, he called up and said, let's
[Guest]: go and watch Sachin Tendulkar bat. I had some work. I didn't go along with him. But I followed
[Guest]: him. And we met at CCI. And by that time, Sachin was, I think he had notched up another
[Guest]: hundred or whatever. So Dilip was most excited to see him.
[Guest]: Also, I think in the, in the Bombay cricket environment, they were all watching this young
[Guest]: boy very intently, not just Dilip, but Raj Singh Dungarpur, you know, who rates amongst
[Guest]: the most amazing, fascinating characters I've seen and had the experience of knowing in
[Guest]: Indian cricket. So he was there. He was, you know, he was just kind of, you couldn't put
[Guest]: him down. He was just bouncing all over the place in CCI, watching Tendulkar bat. And
[Guest]: he would come and, you know, he'd go from person to person, say, did you see that shot?
[Guest]: You know, did you see? Now that they put a fielder on the boundary, so he's not hitting
[Guest]: the fours. He's pushing for ones and twos. See how much cricket intelligence he has.
[Guest]: So, you know, Raj Singh Dungarpur was also president of CCI. And he gave him the membership
[Guest]: when he was not even eligible. He was underage in that sense. But he was absolutely obsessed
[Guest]: by Sachin. So watching Sachin at that age was, in many ways, an exposure to a genius
[Guest]: in the making. And also, in many ways, an insight into what was happening in Indian
[Guest]: cricket around that same time, how the spread of cricket was happening, not just in Bombay.
[Guest]: But you know, there are two eras, which I say, one is the pre-Sachin era and the post-Sachin
[Guest]: era. In the pre-Sachin era, to which all of us belonged, parents would say, school jao,
[Guest]: yeh ho, whatever sports is fine, this, that, we'll see how it goes. But don't waste your
[Guest]: time too much. First get a job and then. In the post-Sachin era, now you go to Shivaji
[Guest]: Park or any of the maidans, young mums and dads go and tell the coach, isko tendulkar
[Guest]: banalo, isko Sachin banao. They are not interested in whether they finish 12th with distinction
[Guest]: or graduation. But if they can, if you can become a Sachin or now Virat Kohli or Dhoni,
[Guest]: that is enough for them, which is a major shift. Tendulkar was, you know, as you said,
[Guest]: a seminal moment in Indian cricket and Indian life. You know, you just started reimagining,
[Guest]: especially where sport is concerned. And cricket, if you look at the average age of cricketers,
[Guest]: the English always used to have fairly experienced guys getting into the test team. They played
[Guest]: some eight, ten, seven years of county cricket and they come in. The Pakistanis used to have
[Guest]: the youngest, you know, teenagers would break into the team. The Aussies would blood their
[Guest]: cricketers fairly young. The Indians were, because there was a whole process, schools
[Guest]: cricket, college cricket, then you get into universities cricket, if you do well there,
[Guest]: then you get into Ranji cricket. So, 20, 21, 22 was usually the age when the Indian cricketers
[Guest]: would get into the national team or why for a place in the national team. Tendulkar created
[Guest]: a paradigm shift. Now, and with the IPL coming in, you know, there are 16, 17, 18-year-old
[Guest]: guys getting in. If you're 24, 25 and if you've not made it to the Indian team today, it's
[Guest]: tough. You know, it's tough. Maybe your sell-by date has gone in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think there was a lament a couple of years back from Shreya Sair. You're saying,
[Guest]: hey, I'm 24, time is passing by. I need to get back to the Indian team.
[Guest]: I mean, exactly. You know, one can sense what he's feeling because it's not just about Shreya
[Guest]: Sair. There are swarms of cricketers coming from all over the country. What were the bastions
[Guest]: of other sports earlier, hockey, for instance, in Punjab is no longer, you know, the bastion
[Guest]: for hockey. It's also, you know, Kerala is no longer the bastion for football. You know,
[Guest]: cricket is just taken over. So, you might feel that it's a bit of a lopsided situation
[Guest]: in where sports is concerned in India, but that's how it is.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's interesting that it's lopsided in terms of playing. It's not lopsided in
[Amit Varma]: terms of watching per se. That people are watching many more sports with enthusiasm
[Amit Varma]: than they did once in a while, which I think to some extent is also reflected in the sports
[Amit Varma]: pages and the kind of coverage that happens. But, you know, you can watch a lot of Premier
[Amit Varma]: League, but there's no quality football really happening in India, which can make you aspire
[Amit Varma]: to that. So, I'd actually say that there were three eras. Like, there's a pre-Sachin
[Amit Varma]: era. And the Sachin era is really the post-liberalization era also, in a sense, wherein the game goes
[Amit Varma]: to the small towns and that sort of that dominance of Delhi-Mumbai is kind of broken. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, it just goes into an entirely different sort of demographic, as it were. And the third
[Amit Varma]: era for me is really IPL, because I think it just changed the incentive so much. In
[Amit Varma]: terms of the ecosystem being so much richer, the incentives, you know, even in the post-Sachin
[Amit Varma]: era, if a parent wanted her child to be Sachin, they would realize that it's a nice dream
[Amit Varma]: to have, but the odds are thoroughly stacked against it. And if the kid doesn't make it
[Amit Varma]: to the national team, nothing's going to happen. But today, that's not the case. Today, your
[Amit Varma]: kid doesn't have to be in the top 10 in the country. A top 100 in the country means he's
[Guest]: making crores. Yes. And it just opened up, you know, so many options for young kids because
[Guest]: there are more teams. Also, what made a big difference, you talked about the liberalization
[Guest]: coming in that era, also cable television. Yeah, exactly. That's what really took it
[Guest]: into every house, every nook and corner of this country. And, you know, cricket is played
[Guest]: over a longer period of time than every other sport, maybe golf, which runs over a few days.
[Guest]: But otherwise, test cricket over five days. One-day cricket is a one-day match, you know.
[Guest]: Even T20 is three and a half hours, four hours, which is more. So, there's more television
[Guest]: time. And while cricket is a team sport, actually, the focus is on individuals. So, when a batsman
[Guest]: is there in the middle, he's at the crease, the camera is focused entirely on him when
[Guest]: the ball is about to be bowled. When a fielder feels the ball, it is that one player that
[Guest]: you're focusing on. If he takes a catch, then the celebrations and all that. In many ways,
[Guest]: it's a one-on-one rivalry between the batsman and the bowler. So, it just gives so much
[Amit Varma]: more importance to the individual in a team game. Also, not just to the individual person,
[Amit Varma]: but to the individual moment. Like a three-hour game of cricket is not one event. It is a
[Guest]: series of all these small events, like depending on how many balls there are. It's all discrete
[Guest]: events. Look at it this way, Amit. If I'm a bowler, I can bowl over the wicket, round
[Guest]: the wicket, over the wicket. I have to just inform the umpire. I can keep changing my
[Guest]: mind. The captain or the bowler can keep changing the field. So, every ball is an independent
[Guest]: event in itself. And it's very staccato. Unlike, say, football or hockey or some of the other
[Guest]: team sports where the flow is not easily stopped. But here, you can deliberately stop it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, every moment in a football field is, in a sense, determined by the moment before,
[Amit Varma]: where everybody was, what was happening, all the momentum and direction and everything.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas that might be psychologically true in a cricketing sense, but otherwise every
[Guest]: ball is a separate event.
[Guest]: Which is why there's so much importance to tactics and strategy. Because in football
[Guest]: and hockey or rugby, all the tactics are done prior to, you know, you have changes in tactics,
[Guest]: but the blueprint is prepared much in advance. In cricket nowadays, in T20, perhaps that
[Guest]: is being done more than ever before. But yet, it is how the game unfolds that, you know,
[Guest]: you can improvise, you can implement changes. And that's why the role of the captain becomes
[Guest]: so important. Because the captain is an interventionist. It's not what the manager and coach has told
[Guest]: you earlier. But if, you know, you want to change the field in consultation with the
[Guest]: bowler, then you can do it immediately.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the captains can change the flow of the game in a way that they can't in any other
[Amit Varma]: sport. But see, you know, this is what happened. Two Indians start a conversation. It is about
[Amit Varma]: something, but it always comes down to cricket. We were talking about you. So I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: sort of, though of course, we will keep coming back to cricket. But to get back to the biographical
[Amit Varma]: bit, you've already kind of spoken about how you discovered, you know, you got the wisdom
[Amit Varma]: creators. Almanac, you've spoken elsewhere about how you used to buy secondhand cricket
[Guest]: books from the footpath at Andloom House in the Fort area in Mumbai. I think that's part
[Guest]: of your introduction.
[Guest]: Secondhand books, yes. Playfair Cricket Annual was my favourite because wisdom was still
[Amit Varma]: pretty expensive.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a moment where beyond a cricket book, you discovered that there is something called
[Amit Varma]: cricket writing?
[Guest]: Yes. You know, one went from the book and said, you know, you start, you're at an age
[Guest]: when you start exploring. And because cricket was gripping my mind, and how do I find, you
[Guest]: know, something that is happening every day, keep myself updated. That's when you turn
[Guest]: to the newspapers. And we used to get two or three newspapers in the house, where amongst
[Guest]: the first names that I read from sports was K.N. Prabhu of the Times of India. There was
[Guest]: also Ron Hendricks, who was the Indian Express, I think in those days. He didn't write too
[Guest]: much on cricket. He was more for the other sports, but he had a good, he had a good turn
[Guest]: of phrase, which I started enjoying. Prabhu was very lyrical. And, you know, he would
[Guest]: blend a lot of nostalgia with match reports and, you know, very distinctive flavour to
[Guest]: his writing. And when I got to know him personally, many years later, he was, he just about completely
[Guest]: fit the, you know, the image I had in my mind of what kind of a person he would be, how
[Guest]: he would look and how he would be as a companion. I shared the room, I shared a room with him
[Guest]: on several occasions during test matches. And then there was much later Khaled Ansari.
[Guest]: 68 was when he started Sportsweek magazine. Khaled Ansari was all fire and brimstone,
[Guest]: you know, all very, his editorials would be all taking the pants off authorities and federation
[Guest]: heads and, you know, whatever else. But it was good fun to read. And it kind of enticed
[Guest]: me into this whole thing about sports writing and sports journalism. So I started reading
[Guest]: the newspapers very, I became a very voracious reader. And obviously, when you're at that
[Guest]: age, and you have a passion for sports, you start reading from the back page onwards.
[Guest]: But remember, in the 60s and 70s, right up to the 80s, 90s, perhaps, sports was like
[Guest]: a country cousin in the newsroom. You had one, one and a half pages, so it was, you
[Guest]: know, just too much space to see the pages now. And I remember when I joined DNA, when
[Guest]: we started DNA, we had a six page, eight page supplement, which is unthinkable. In 2005,
[Guest]: I think that was. So otherwise, sports was one, one page, one and a half page at best.
[Guest]: And then it became two pages, two and a half pages, three pages. But that's a function
[Guest]: also of the economic growth of the country when, you know, post liberalization, most
[Guest]: of these things happened. But my liking for sports writing started very early, I think
[Guest]: in about 68, 69, 70 was the time and 71 was the turning point in the lives of so many
[Guest]: people who grew up in that era, India winning against the West Indies and India winning
[Guest]: against England. And that twin series, I think, in in many ways, just made me a complete cricket
[Guest]: nut. That was, I mean, I was very fond of cricket, but then it became an obsession in
[Guest]: 1970, 71.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things I liked about your anthology is not just that for any lover
[Amit Varma]: of Indian cricket, it's obviously manna from the heavens, because there's so much great
[Amit Varma]: material here, but it's also an anthology of cricket writing. Like these people you've
[Amit Varma]: just named, you've got a couple of pieces from Prabhu about 71, you've got a piece by
[Amit Varma]: Khalid Ansari about 74, I think. And I picked up this lovely line from Prabhu, because in
[Amit Varma]: 71, in one of the reports that you've reproduced in your book, he writes about how a lot of
[Amit Varma]: critics have been proved wrong by that first test win, because they had said that Sardesai
[Amit Varma]: and I think Durrani and Venkat should not have been selected, but they have been. And
[Amit Varma]: for these critics, he writes these two sentences, quote, the new literates of cricket, however,
[Amit Varma]: are rarely right in such matters. Their petty prejudices have been exposed by the manner
[Amit Varma]: in which these players have performed, stop quote. And I was like, dude, if K.N. Prabhu
[Amit Varma]: lived in the time of Twitter, how many people would he respond to?
[Guest]: That perhaps is two harshest sentences I've read from K.N. Prabhu. But, you know, he had
[Guest]: a very strong impact on, you know, cricket writing was by and large in the English newspapers.
[Guest]: The regional newspapers became stronger later. And there have been some very, very fine writers,
[Guest]: Bal Karmarkar, I know from Maharashtra Times. And he was also a very avid cricket follower
[Guest]: and cricket writer. He went on to also become, I think, managing editor of the paper. So,
[Guest]: he moved away a little from sports. But regional papers joined in later because the space that
[Guest]: was available for sports was far more meagre in regional papers, more were available in
[Guest]: English newspapers, because most of the advertising came to English newspapers. So, they had more
[Guest]: pages. So, if Times of India in the 1970s, 80s was 10, 12 pages, the regional papers
[Guest]: would be six, eight pages. And therefore, there was a restriction on how much space
[Guest]: you could give. So, yeah, I mean, K.N. Prabhu, I think these people brought home to people
[Guest]: like me, readers like me, K.N. Prabhu was in the West Indies, K.N. Prabhu was in England.
[Guest]: So, he would also talk about, you know, clouds hovering over Lourdes or Oval, and you start
[Guest]: getting a sense of what England could be, you know, and not knowing that you would ever
[Guest]: get to England when you're 10, 11, 12, you have no idea. But you start enjoying that,
[Guest]: you know, the imagery that he creates. And that's part of the fascination for cricket
[Guest]: writing, which grips or at least gripped me when I was young, that it took you into distant
[Guest]: lands and brought you, you know, color and tapestry and flavor of those lands. It's a
[Guest]: lot more now, you know, cricket writers today have to do a lot more work. They bring you
[Guest]: color stories, they bring you profiles of people who may have no relation at all with
[Guest]: the game, but they are emblematic in the sense of where you are, which country you're touring.
[Guest]: So for instance, you might meet, you might read about a chapati maker in Trinidad, you
[Guest]: know, who will throw in a stray line about an Indian cricketer that becomes reason enough
[Guest]: to do a story. So, all that is far more now, because there's more space available and obviously
[Guest]: there's more consumption available. But in the old days, you had to live with what you
[Guest]: got and these guys were bringing home some fantastic, you know, for an impressionable
[Guest]: mind, creating this fantastic story that one could absorb and put into the hard disk. So,
[Guest]: I remember that when I went to England for the first time, that was for the 1983 World
[Guest]: Cup. Apart from reading and whatever else I had done of K. N. Prabhu, I had met him
[Guest]: by then. I was a journalist. I was, you know, in awe of him, but I spent a lot of time with
[Guest]: him trying to understand what touring meant, what was his, you know, when he met Sir Garfield
[Guest]: Sobers in person or Rohan Kanhai, who was also one of my favourites, what were they
[Guest]: like as people and grounds that he went to, Queen's Park Oval or Lords. So, when I went
[Guest]: to England, I was looking for things that K. N. Prabhu had also seen and had told me.
[Guest]: Not that I found all of it, you know, so, but it was a great way of, it was a kind of
[Guest]: a segue into a whole cricket world, which I had only dreamt about. And then it's now
[Guest]: coming up, coming, coming to fruition in my own life. And that was a source of great delight.
[Guest]: I mean, when I went to England, I was 27, almost 28 for the World Cup, but I almost
[Guest]: felt like, you know, Alice in Wonderland. No, D. J. Woo, but also, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: I knew the grounds, Lords, Grace Gates, but to enter that and see, I mean, I had some
[Guest]: great experiences with Grace Gates and, you know, so, for instance, when I went and not
[Guest]: all experiences were great, you know, when we went to England, when I say we are fellow
[Guest]: journalists also, we were refused accreditation for matches at Lords. So, you know, because
[Guest]: MCC was a distinct body and the others were with the TCCB, Test and County Cricket Board.
[Guest]: So, we got passes for all the other matches and we were refused. He said, no, unless India
[Guest]: is playing here, which may be in the final and ha-ha-ha, not likely. So, no pass. As
[Guest]: it happened, India reached the final. So, prior to the match, I went to the, I went
[Guest]: to Grace Gates, you know, chest puffed out and the stewards at the Grace Gates are real
[Guest]: stick in the muds, you know, very stiff upper lip and where are you going? I said, I have
[Guest]: to go and get my accreditation. So, why haven't you got your accreditation? I said, we had
[Guest]: not qualified, India had not qualified. So, now they've qualified. India was in West
[Guest]: Indies and I need an accreditation. So, this guy turns around to his other colleague in
[Guest]: the, you know, steward at the Grace Gates and says, oh, now we've got Gandhi coming
[Guest]: to Lords. Because that was the time Gandhi, the movie also had, you know, made waves globally.
[Guest]: So, that's how it was, that's how pompous it was, you know, and of course, then India
[Guest]: went on to win the World Cup. And now, I think, I don't think anybody questions Indian journalists
[Guest]: going to Lords because India is so strong in the sport today, that if you don't have
[Guest]: a game with India at Lords for X number of years, then obviously their finances are dented.
[Guest]: So, India is a much coveted team or a much coveted country to come and play in Lords
[Guest]: or Oval or wherever else, which wasn't necessarily the case earlier.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. I mean, it's like Mohammed and the Mountain. It's the roles have kind
[Amit Varma]: of reversed. But before we come to 83, and of course, I'll, you know, dredge into your
[Amit Varma]: memories on that, a couple of questions strike me from what you were just talking about.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is this, that there's a situation that I remember happening in the pre-television
[Amit Varma]: days, which we've alluded to earlier that you're not actually visually seeing something
[Amit Varma]: play out. So when I think of 71, for example, we've all read so much about Sardesai and
[Amit Varma]: how he batted and he was really as important as Gavaskar in many ways, you know, a remarkable
[Amit Varma]: series there. But I can't picture him in my mindset, because I've never really seen him
[Amit Varma]: per se. You spoke about Rohan Kanhai being one of your heroes. And I don't know if you
[Amit Varma]: actually saw him either back then or not. So on the one hand, we are having to construct
[Amit Varma]: all of this in our heads, which is one reason they might be stronger in our memories. On
[Amit Varma]: the other hand, there is the media being produced about this, you know, the writing about this
[Amit Varma]: is not that much, there's a small sample size. And the people who are writing these reports,
[Amit Varma]: their incentives are to dramatize everything. Because every cricket writer wants to write
[Amit Varma]: an epic cricket report. And whenever something epic actually happens, they want to make it
[Amit Varma]: even more epic than that. And that's a temptation. I remember that I gave way to when I was a
[Amit Varma]: young writer in my 20s. It's like you hear about Wally Hammond writing about Amar Singh
[Amit Varma]: and how the ball came off the cracks of doors, you know that immortal quote. And at one level,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's memorable, everybody remembers it. But at another level, I'm just thinking
[Amit Varma]: no it didn't. All of our fast bowlers, forget Bumrah, you know, the fifth net bowler for
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai Indians probably can bowl that exact ball which drove Wally Hammond to say whatever
[Amit Varma]: he said. And this then begs the question that when you're growing up in those times, how
[Amit Varma]: reliable are these memories because part of these memories are your own construction.
[Amit Varma]: And partly they are based on what people who have the incentive to dramatize unnecessarily
[Amit Varma]: have made it up to be. And eventually, of course, we watch television and we watch Gavaskar
[Amit Varma]: make 96. And we know that, you know, we've seen it with our own eyes. So I'm kind of
[Amit Varma]: asking you at one level about the fan in you, but also about the journalist in you.
[Guest]: So I mean, this is a complex question. And I think it's a very interesting question.
[Guest]: I think this is my surmise that before television, before one could actually access matches visually
[Guest]: and make your own judgment, you relied on somebody else's opinion or his reading of
[Guest]: a situation. And in the case of sports, because, you know, there's so much glory and there's
[Guest]: so much achievement associated with it. There was always this thing for people who witnessed
[Guest]: it to pump it up or also be skating about it without quite understanding why they need
[Guest]: to be. So both worked, you know, one could be, you know, I mean, just to give you an
[Guest]: example and it's all very situational. When Douglas Jardine implemented body line as a
[Guest]: tactic, all hell broke loose. But Clive Lloyd's West Indian team with four fast bowlers did
[Guest]: exactly that. Without except for the field restriction, there was no not much change.
[Guest]: In fact, these four guys were all lethal, you know, and even when helmets were not as
[Guest]: much in use as they are now. Gavaskar, for instance, never wore the helmet. So a lot
[Guest]: of what we see in the pre-television era is, and when we read, is all very situational.
[Guest]: It is dramatized. You know, Neville Cardus, one of the greatest writers, many say that
[Guest]: he just completely exaggerated. It was his imagination more than what actually happened.
[Guest]: What I think also is that matches were sparse and scarce. Independent India's first series
[Guest]: was to Australia, 1947. The next series when we went to Australia was when? In 1967. Twenty
[Guest]: years later. So 20 years later, if I was K. N. Prabhu, who went on that tour and watching
[Guest]: India play Australia, the whole situation is full of so many dimensions that you end
[Guest]: up either seeing it with a completely exaggerated point of view, or you can be so prosaic that
[Guest]: it makes no sense to your readers. So you have to somehow strike this balance. I can't
[Guest]: go and say that, you know, decent, you know, all good length deliveries, patented gentry
[Guest]: back down the pitch and, you know, everything is fine. No, that would not work at all. So
[Guest]: the journalist in K. N. Prabhu, or if I was there, I would say, how do I sharpen things
[Guest]: up or how do I make it exciting for the reader back home? Because he has no other way of
[Guest]: knowing what is happening. And therefore, I think a lot of writing that has happened
[Guest]: prior to television becoming all pervasive is of a certain flavour. So you'll find in
[Guest]: a lot of stuff, even like a very polished writer like K. N. Prabhu, if India has done
[Guest]: well in a certain match, his opening sentence will be, rejoice, we've done it, you know,
[Guest]: something like that. To carry that sentiment of the achievements of a team back to people
[Guest]: who have absolutely no access as to what is happening. And also one must understand the
[Guest]: mindset of, or the national psyche of the people back then. The way people see themselves
[Guest]: as Indians today is vastly different from how they saw themselves in 71, or even 80,
[Guest]: and certainly of 47. I must tell you this, in 1947, India went to Australia. In one of
[Guest]: the county matches, not in a test match, Don Bradman got his 100th century. And it was
[Guest]: of an Indian bowler who lived in Baroda. And when I was in Sportsweek, and I was editing
[Guest]: Sportsweek, there would be a letter every third day, postcard coming, that, you know,
[Guest]: so-and-so has not got enough recognition for being the bowler of which Don Bradman scored
[Guest]: his 100th century, from the cricketer himself. So you can imagine that the sense of pride
[Guest]: was, hamare saamne saw, you know, he made his 100th century. Not that, you know, I got
[Guest]: his wicket, I didn't allow him to make the 100th century. And that is also how writers
[Guest]: then saw it. If I was a writer in 1947, accompanying the Indian team, and I'm what, first of all,
[Guest]: I would be completely beguiled by the presence of Don Bradman in the middle. Because Don
[Guest]: Bradman was, you know, Don Bradman, Don Bradman, yeah. And then to see him bat and then to
[Guest]: make him achieve this landmark, and you have to just gush. And not worry about whether
[Guest]: it came against your own team, you know, which is there to compete. And therefore, I think
[Guest]: the whole situational thing matters in where you are. You know, sport is epochal. It's
[Guest]: to do with, it's not ordinary, you know, especially at the elite level. What these guys are supposed
[Guest]: to do is something extraordinary. And whatever is extraordinary will invite a lot more imagination
[Guest]: attached to it than what is everyday humdrum life that we all live, we all lead. So if
[Guest]: Kapil Dev hits four sixes of Eddie Hemmings to avoid the follow-on, you can't say he hit
[Guest]: four sixes and India avoided the follow-on. You know, you have to have two, three paras
[Guest]: which describe it in such terms that it grips the imagination of the reader. If it doesn't
[Guest]: do that, then it's a problem. But the writing changes from a journalism point of view, if
[Guest]: I'm also watching it as a viewer. If I'm watching it, and if I read a report which is complete
[Guest]: exaggeration, then I'll say, what the hell is this guy talking about here? I watched
[Guest]: the match. It wasn't like this, you know. So that's been the shift in your, how do you
[Guest]: adapt even your writing skills and your journalism in the visual era, as we say. And now, of
[Guest]: course, it's not just watching a match with two cameras or four cameras. Now there are
[Guest]: 28 cameras. There are multiple slow-mo's. They are taking it down to the, you know,
[Guest]: they are splitting it into, it's fragmented so much that what is it that the writer can
[Guest]: add, which is already not being discussed by the slow-mo's and the experts on television,
[Guest]: is really the challenge now for journalists. What do they do as writers? You know, is there
[Guest]: a quick, do I just go and get a quote from, quote each from five experts who are there,
[Guest]: or five other former players who are there, or do I just get a fancy reaction from the
[Guest]: stands? What do I do? How do I construct a story? It's become a, that's become the big
[Guest]: challenge. When I went on my first tour, it was to Pakistan. I crossed over on foot with
[Guest]: my luggage and one manual typewriter. And I had taken loads, it was a three-month tour.
[Guest]: So I took loads of sports magazines and film magazines. Time pass karna hai, what do you
[Guest]: do between test matches and, you know, or during test matches, five days in a place.
[Guest]: Five days before smartphones, you can't browse Twitter and do video calls.
[Guest]: So all my film magazines got confiscated by the customs that they wouldn't allow film
[Guest]: magazines from India to get into, and political magazines. Sports magazines jo aap leke jao.
[Guest]: But those are things that, these are experiential stories that one can, they have become far
[Guest]: more commonplace now. On a cricket tour, what else happens outside the matches itself has
[Guest]: also gained a lot of currency, which wasn't there earlier. You focused on the cricket
[Guest]: and you got off, you know, and, you know, you did your tour diary, which was not in
[Guest]: so much, not, you know, there was not much gravel in it. Now there's a lot more that
[Guest]: one can do. But where the actual match is concerned, since the viewers seeing everything
[Guest]: in acute detail, then what do you do? That's the challenge now for the journalists today.
[Amit Varma]: So that's what my next question was about. But before that, an observation to again point
[Amit Varma]: out how much I agree with that dilemma of a cricket writer, that you've had a session
[Amit Varma]: where there are like three runs in eight overs, what do you even write? It's very boring,
[Amit Varma]: bowler bowls, backspin blocks, and the writer feels the imperative to make it something
[Amit Varma]: more. And typically, it is always something more, but it is always something more at a
[Amit Varma]: mental level, you don't know what the internal drama is that is there on the cricket field.
[Amit Varma]: And often the writer will replicate their internal cricket drama while writing about
[Amit Varma]: what's happening on the field, which may or may not match up with what actually happened.
[Amit Varma]: It's like I've had a film director tell me once that boss, every time I read a critic
[Amit Varma]: writing about a film, I'm like, like, what has this person seen? That's not what I made.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the second thing is about the shift in writing itself, in the sense that I remember
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, when I joined Wisden, which later bought Crickinfo in the early 2000s,
[Amit Varma]: it was understood that the matches that we are reporting on are being watched on television,
[Amit Varma]: right? Information is now a commodity. If you're writing from England in 1971, information
[Amit Varma]: is valuable. Yes, you know, you have to describe everything, you have to try to paint that
[Amit Varma]: picture in the reader's mind and all of that. But in 2001, you know, just 30 years later,
[Amit Varma]: it's all there on the TV screen. So as writers, and I remember, you know, looking at match
[Amit Varma]: reports in the British newspapers, like the Guardian and the Observer and all that and
[Amit Varma]: the match report the next day would never describe what happened. Yes, it would go into
[Amit Varma]: other areas, it would be a little bit of commentary, a little color when we used to create our
[Amit Varma]: packages in Crickinfo, we'd have these color pieces, where, you know, whoever was at the
[Amit Varma]: ground would go out and report on something interesting, and you'd have your commentary
[Amit Varma]: and you'd have all of that. And that would in a sense change the writing and change the
[Amit Varma]: imperative for the journalist in the sense that you're no longer describing what happened,
[Amit Varma]: everybody knows what happened, what happened, you have to go deeper. And as you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out in these current times, where it's not just the 28 camera angles, it's the 280 statistical
[Amit Varma]: angles in terms of how finely diced stats have become. You know, even in football, for
[Amit Varma]: example, like one stat, which is really important for me when I watch football, is what is known
[Amit Varma]: as XG, which is expected goals. So it's not how many goals you actually scored, but how
[Amit Varma]: many goals you would have been expected to score the way you play. And over the long
[Amit Varma]: run, it evens out. And that's, for me, a much better measure of how well a team played than
[Amit Varma]: actual goals scored. And even in cricket, where that kind of probabilistic thinking
[Amit Varma]: was kind of absent over the decades, I find that more and more young writers are doing
[Amit Varma]: very interesting work in terms of just understanding the game and looking at the statistical analysis.
[Amit Varma]: But that dilemma remains, like you pointed out, that when all these stats and these numbers
[Amit Varma]: are there, when all these experts are there on TV, who have played the game themselves,
[Amit Varma]: having their gyaan, what is a cricket writer to do? Ask a two-part question in terms of
[Amit Varma]: the evolution of your writing. Has there been one? And, you know, how would you describe
[Amit Varma]: it? And in general cricket writing, what do you think?
[Guest]: So look, the clear option available to writers, including me, you know, when television became
[Guest]: invasive, was you can't do ball-by-ball description or ordinary description, which everybody is
[Guest]: seeing. So what do you do? What does one do? There are colour pieces, which can be very,
[Guest]: you know, you need the power of expression. You need to be a skilful or skilled writer
[Guest]: to do that, to hold attention, because colour pieces are not easy or are not readily accepted
[Guest]: unless they are done in masterly fashion. You know, at least match reports, people will
[Guest]: say to fill the gaps in their own understanding of what has happened, ki information chahiye,
[Guest]: now information is available. But colour pieces to, for people to read, requires a lot more.
[Guest]: It requires colour, it requires an understanding of the language, of the personality, of how
[Guest]: you probe, how you elicit something from the person who you are profiling, for instance,
[Guest]: or a controversy that you're dealing, what dimensions you can get, you know, into that.
[Guest]: So all that requires skill. And the third or another clear option was get skilled in
[Guest]: analysis, you know, get a more analytical or start getting that analytical bent of mind,
[Guest]: maybe approach a few experts who you have access to immediately available at the ground,
[Guest]: and who either feed your analysis, make it stronger, or offer another dimension, which
[Guest]: you then leave for the reader to decide that this is what it looks like, but this is what
[Guest]: A, B or C feel or two players who contradict each other. So just makes it a little more
[Guest]: exciting for the, for the reader and say, wow, I didn't know this, you know, achha
[Guest]: it's like this. Sometimes you use clever tactics, you know, throw names, which impress the reader,
[Guest]: or tell the reader, yes, this guy's weight carries with if Gavaskar you quote or Tendulkar,
[Guest]: you know, people say, wow, you know, there must be something to it. But how do you weave
[Guest]: that in then becomes a skill into your story. So I think that's what is happening. As you
[Guest]: as we all know, now, there is everything that is available to the viewer and the listener
[Guest]: in real time. And more than just that, it's diced up into nano, you know, bits of information
[Guest]: that you might need, then there are the experts who are all former players, most of them who
[Guest]: are also giving their gyan. So what is what is left for you to do? Actually, quite a lot.
[Guest]: Okay, so let me explain. Cricket has become so big in India. I feel that if you want to
[Guest]: be a cricket writer today, you better skill yourself into forensics, because you never
[Guest]: know some, you know, Bob Woolmer died in the West Indies of a heart attack. And, you know,
[Guest]: all hell broke loose as if he's somebody somebody murdered him. And the reportage all changed
[Guest]: completely from World Cup cricket to every other thing except cricket. You better know
[Guest]: how to read balance sheets, because BCCI is money, the ecosystem that of the IPL, what
[Guest]: does it mean in terms of money, profits, profitability, losses, valuations that are going up of teams,
[Guest]: etc, etc. Those are hard cricket stories, which don't come from players, necessarily,
[Guest]: you have to go out and seek them. So you're not, you cannot remain a conventional old
[Guest]: style cricket writer now, that is getting limited in value, you must understand mental
[Guest]: health today, for any sports. So therefore, also for cricket, you had Ben Stokes, the
[Guest]: best all rounder in the world, perhaps the best cricket in the world, virtually taking
[Guest]: a whole year off. Now there is enough scope to do so many stories about mental health,
[Guest]: using Ben Stokes as a peg, and so on. And then there is the third or one more dimension,
[Guest]: which is, where all our lives are data led. There's so much data available. Virat Kohli
[Guest]: has played 48 balls of this bowler and he's made 62 runs, but he's also got out five times.
[Guest]: You know, that kind of data collation and extrapolation from that data can also lead
[Guest]: to stories. But it requires, again, conditioning your journalistic practices or your mindset
[Guest]: towards those things to remain relevant. So what is happening is now for the challenge
[Guest]: for professional writers, cricket writers, is to remain relevant. Because information
[Guest]: is coming from all quarters, you know, everybody has got information. Even those who are not
[Guest]: in media, you could be on Twitter, and an avid cricket follower, and you hit on a great
[Guest]: angle, which you might see, you might do on a thread, which runs into seven, eight threads,
[Guest]: and might have more relevance than what any cricket writer has written. So, you know,
[Guest]: if your audience is exposed to so much, then how do you get that get currency? Why should
[Guest]: people come and read you? So you have to develop some attributes, not just longevity in service,
[Guest]: some attributes, which tell a reader that, you know, I must go and find out what he has
[Guest]: also written on this subject, or let me first find out if he has. And if he has, what has
[Guest]: he done? And therefore, you know, that's how I think it is working now. Because otherwise,
[Guest]: there's a big threat that relevancy of or the relevance of writers will just vanish.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you that it's actually really exciting. And I think one way just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud at Summit Up is that a cricket writer today should not aspire to be Cardus. She
[Amit Varma]: should aspire to be CLR James. Absolutely. It's a fantastic analogy. You're not just
[Amit Varma]: covering the sport. You're not covering what happened on the field, 11 men versus 11 men
[Amit Varma]: or 11 women versus 11 women. But you're covering everything around it. Yes. You know, the sociology
[Amit Varma]: of it, the psychology of it. And the politics of it. And the politics of it increasingly
[Amit Varma]: in these modern times. Yes. Which one wonders whether one will be able to write about cricket
[Guest]: after a while. Yes. Yeah. And the kinds of personalities, you know, I think that's also
[Guest]: the mental aspect of sport is the biggest issue that has emerged over the last maybe
[Guest]: 25-30 years, and getting bigger and bigger. You know, I used to read when I was in Sports
[Guest]: Week in my early years. So there would be Tennis World, or World of Tennis, one of these
[Guest]: magazines from which used to come from the US. And I remember that was the McEnroe,
[Guest]: Connors, Borg era. And then, you know, there would be so much about the mental aspect of
[Guest]: tennis. And I used to say, what the hell? I mean, sport is sport. You go out there,
[Guest]: you know, your technique, your skills, that is what matters. But I, you know, when I think
[Guest]: back how wrong I was, because ultimately, everything else is secondary to the mental
[Guest]: aspect. You know, we talk of great Caribbean flair, and, you know, the way they played.
[Guest]: And, you know, there was never a worry in their mind the way they would go out and play.
[Guest]: But actually, that's a stereotype. Because there was a mental aspect to the game. The
[Guest]: aspirations and the ambitions may have been different. The sense of leaving an impact
[Guest]: of their own identity may have differed from ours, as CLR James expresses so wonderfully
[Guest]: in Beyond the Boundary, you know. It's an expression of West Indian, Caribbean thought
[Guest]: and life, and also racial politics and everything. It's a magnum opus when you look at it, you
[Guest]: know. West Indies cricket, how it fits into CLR James's theory, you know, as a Marxist
[Guest]: philosopher is absolutely riveting. You may disagree, but it's riveting, you know, to
[Guest]: think about it in those dimensions. In India, we never thought about it like that. You know,
[Guest]: we've started to think now, in India, I think we're still very personality obsessed, rather
[Guest]: than the sport and its ramifications in national life. We're getting there. We're talking more
[Guest]: and more about it. But I think that that is a very important dimension that needs to be
[Guest]: looked at more aggressively. Where cricket writing is concerned now, I think because
[Guest]: it is coming from everywhere, including the non-formal sector, I think there's a lot of
[Guest]: cacophony. Obviously, there will be a lot of mediocrity, but there'll also be some brilliant
[Guest]: stuff coming. Unexpectedly, you don't necessarily have to look at it only from the 15 names
[Guest]: you know. It can come from anywhere. And, you know, one has to appreciate. So, if you
[Guest]: enjoy cricket writing and reading about cricket, obviously, you have to make the effort to
[Guest]: find out where this is going to come from. It's a clutter. It's, you know, it's very
[Guest]: random, it's disorganized, it's chaotic, but it is there. And I think overall, it enriches
[Amit Varma]: cricket writing.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I think that, you know, just from what I have kind of seen in the last 22 years,
[Amit Varma]: I think the fact that those barriers to entry have gone, that you don't have gatekeepers
[Amit Varma]: of taste and style and form standing in the way that anybody can write anything and then
[Amit Varma]: let water find its own level. You know, I think that's incredible, because I think what
[Amit Varma]: often happens, especially in mainstream media, is that you have people who have a set vision
[Amit Varma]: of what something is like, that coverage should be like this. This is what I want a cricket
[Amit Varma]: report should be, this is the form, do this, don't do that, don't do that, do this, you
[Amit Varma]: know. And I think all of that acts as a tremendous constraint, especially when that mainstream
[Amit Varma]: media becomes out of touch, especially when your kind of gatekeepers are not particularly
[Amit Varma]: competent as can often be the case, that, you know, just having the ability to go out
[Amit Varma]: there like I, you know, in my writing class, I had one of my participants in the latest
[Amit Varma]: cohort is a cricket writer somewhere for some website, I forget the name, though, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't mention it, even if I hadn't forgotten it. But he spoke about how the pressure there
[Amit Varma]: is always to follow whatever is the latest thing that happened, you know, that Virat
[Amit Varma]: Kohli got a bruise on his elbow, you have 40 stories on that. And then in the evening,
[Amit Varma]: something else would have happened and you have 40 stories on that. And you're constantly
[Amit Varma]: going from immediate story to story, all of it is shallow. And he was complaining about
[Amit Varma]: how he doesn't get the time to kind of sit back and do his own writing. And all of that,
[Amit Varma]: which is, again, a dilemma coming from a cricket writer, who would probably be a fan of CLR
[Amit Varma]: James, who probably wants to do that kind of writing. But within mainstream media, that
[Amit Varma]: space isn't there. Because one, there is this desperation to keep the eyeballs going because
[Amit Varma]: you're in that game, where you're increasingly becoming irrelevant anyway. And that's just
[Guest]: not there.
[Guest]: So that's, that's part of the problem with mainstream media, irrespective of sector,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, it could be sports, it could be politics, it could be business. So there's
[Guest]: a herd instinct at play there. So if it is Kohli, you know, everybody will write about
[Guest]: Kohli that day, you know, and then it's only a matter of debating whose first three paragraphs
[Guest]: read better than the others. And that's you got the rest of the story.
[Amit Varma]: It's like when Chuck Prince of Citibank said about the financial boom that happened before
[Amit Varma]: the crash in 2008. And he said, when the music's playing, everyone has to dance.
[Guest]: Correct. Yeah, that's true. But I think, you know, so the consumption of content for want
[Guest]: of a better word or consumption of media has changed dramatically. And therefore, and it's
[Guest]: also changed dramatically because the pipelines feeding media or information to the world
[Guest]: at large have also changed. It's been a massive change. Today, it can come from any quarter.
[Guest]: Mainstream media, I think, is hamstrung. It's becoming predictable. And in many ways, it
[Guest]: is becoming not gratifying enough, you know, for what I'm looking for. I'm speaking generally
[Guest]: that it may not gratify me. And it's like when you switch on television sets today,
[Guest]: you switch on one, you don't need to switch on the others, you know exactly what is happening
[Guest]: on the other channels. The rare channel which doesn't do what everybody else is doing, you'll
[Guest]: go and switch that on. Because you want something else to be, you know, fed into your, you know,
[Guest]: you want to consume that. Otherwise, I'm not gaining anything. Ultimately, we all start
[Guest]: making these calculations in our own minds. What am I getting out of it? If I want to
[Guest]: watch the same nonsense, why should I shift from channel A, B, C, D, E? I'll shut them
[Unknown]: all off.
[Unknown]: Which is what I've done. I don't watch news television.
[Guest]: And I go to a channel which at least tells me something which is not so predictable.
[Guest]: And therefore, I start coveting that. Whether that channel makes money or not is not the
[Guest]: issue. And there'll be a herd, the herd instinct can get so large that it can engulf an entire
[Guest]: nation on certain issues. So, that doesn't make it right, you know. For seekers, you'll
[Guest]: have to look at things which gratify you, which give you that little delight, which
[Guest]: give you comfort, which give you entertainment, which give you satisfaction, you know, all
[Guest]: of those in the consumption of media.
[Guest]: And likewise, then we can say whether it's in sports or politics or business writing
[Guest]: or business journalism, all of these will have to cater to the demand. Now, there is
[Guest]: one way of looking at how mass media operates is, look, we only do what the public is demanding.
[Guest]: Right? So, that's not an unfair thought. But it also means that you are not venturing into
[Guest]: areas which will explore what else do people want? Or do they still want the same thing?
[Guest]: People switch on the television even out of habit. I'll be cooking, eating, whatever else
[Guest]: the TV is on, or the radio. But is it interesting enough for the consumer or is it just everybody
[Guest]: latching on to a bandwagon, getting on the bandwagon and doing the same productive, same
[Guest]: predictable stuff for years, is really something as a professional practitioner of journalism
[Guest]: or running a media house that you have to think about. Now, I'm saying this very, it's
[Guest]: very simplistic. But when you run organizations, there's business, the business angle, there
[Guest]: is balance sheet, I must be in the black, I must not be in the red. And therefore, whatever
[Guest]: makes me get into profitability, I will do all those things. They also come into play.
[Guest]: I'm not one to pass judgment. You may do things which are really, frankly, very poor journalism
[Guest]: and make a lot of money. It's possible, you know. You can put on the front page of newspapers
[Guest]: like in England, you know, some papers, some tabloids put pictures of men or women in various
[Guest]: stages of undress and people pick it up. Now, again, I'm not passing judgment. But if you
[Guest]: want to do that, that's fine. But there are other things also that can be done. So you
[Guest]: have to take a call. I think what is happening is in the consumption of media, people have
[Guest]: started taking a call. And especially in areas like sports, you know, it's not enough to
[Guest]: say, I belong to the leading newspaper, and therefore, I'm the best. It's not operating
[Guest]: like that at all. That has changed. In the old days, maybe you could say, there would
[Guest]: be, if it has to be contested that you're the best or not, there would be one other
[Guest]: option. Now there are plentiful options. You could say, I'm working for this newspaper,
[Guest]: you've got the best cricket writer. No, you don't. We've got so and so and it will be
[Guest]: restricted to maybe two or three. But now, it's an endless kind of variety you can choose
[Guest]: from.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I used to teach a podcasting course as well. And there I kind of spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: podcasting is so different from radio, in the sense that radio because of all kinds
[Amit Varma]: of financial incentives and imperatives, especially in India, where FM licenses cost so much,
[Amit Varma]: and there are restraints on what you can do and cannot do. Radio necessarily will be a
[Amit Varma]: mile broad and an inch deep. You know, whereas with a podcast, you have different podcasters
[Amit Varma]: exploring all kinds of different niches, and you never know what clicks. And the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing there is not that they are catering to niches. The interesting thing there for
[Amit Varma]: me is that those niches come into being because somebody made that exploration in the first
[Amit Varma]: place. Otherwise, nobody would even have known that a niche existed. You know, if there is
[Amit Varma]: a niche today for people who listen to five hour podcast episodes, for example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you got to thank Dan Carlin and Hardcore History. And if you're in India, maybe me. But the
[Amit Varma]: point is that if any of us were to pitch this idea to a radio station or a mainstream house
[Amit Varma]: and say, hey, I'll do something like this, and they would laugh us out of the room, because
[Amit Varma]: it's not a safe option. The assumption is we are catering to short attention span, 20
[Amit Varma]: minute karo and whatever, and they're not even going to try that. And that and that's
[Amit Varma]: why it's it's kind of a delightful time where those means of production are now available
[Amit Varma]: to all. And I don't think this has even been explored to the extent that it can be where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you of course got newsletters and blogs and all of that happening. Yeah, but
[Guest]: I think there's a lot more scope for independent voices.
[Guest]: So we live in a multimedia environment, Amit. And it's growing by the day. I think technology
[Guest]: is driving our lives. Yeah. And especially in the consumption of media. And you know,
[Guest]: we talked about what for journalists to remain relevant. Some of the other things that come
[Guest]: to my mind, just to hark back a little, is, you know, you can have great access to performers
[Guest]: and therefore you get an exclusivity. That's a huge advantage if you can manage that. The
[Guest]: other is, conventionally in the media or in journalism is called scoops, you get privileged
[Guest]: information. So one is, of course, having access to Dhoni. You know, Dhoni is a recluse.
[Guest]: If you have access to him and you get Dhoni to speak to you, even if he's talking about
[Guest]: his dog or his dogs or his cars, there is a story, people are waiting to read it, you
[Guest]: know. And if you get privileged information, you get scoops. Why did Virat Kohli suddenly
[Guest]: announce his retirement from T20 captaincy? Now, you know, the reasons have come, but
[Guest]: if you have privileged information as to what was the trigger, what really transpired, then
[Guest]: maybe, you know, not maybe, you will certainly have a lot of people reading you and wanting
[Guest]: to read you further. And that need not be put in purple prose. You don't need purple
[Guest]: prose for this kind of information. So this is one dimension also, which has got a lot
[Guest]: of, which gets a lot of weightage today in media, whichever way it comes from. So there
[Guest]: are, you know, while I do say that, yes, it's getting tougher and tougher, but if you get
[Guest]: the old stereotype of a cricket writer being somebody who's carrying Renan, you know, the
[Guest]: thesaurus with him and coming up with these wonderful turns of phrase and great three
[Guest]: paras leading into the main story, those three paras could be all fluff. And then you get
[Guest]: down to the story. I think that thing has kind of passed, you know, it's become pass.
[Guest]: And now you have to look at other areas. You also have to be conscious of the fact that
[Guest]: attention span of people is very, very low. So what do you do to hold attention? You know,
[Guest]: and then there is the, it's a very interesting situation. If your attention span is low,
[Guest]: that means people are spending two, three minutes, four minute reads, like you see on
[Guest]: many websites, three minute read, four minute read, it comes to you, you know. And then
[Guest]: there are, there's a proliferation of the long reads. You know, you've got five, seven
[Guest]: minute podcasts, and you've also got like the seen and the unseen, which are extensive
[Guest]: extended podcasts, which also people follow very diligently. So all kinds of things are
[Guest]: happening today in the media. It's a very exciting space to be in. But you have to be
[Guest]: also, you know, clear that you'll be sometimes swimming against the tide till you find your
[Guest]: bearings again. Sometimes you'll go, you'll clear distances without any hindrance. And
[Guest]: then again, you'll run into a problem. This is something that is going to happen for the
[Guest]: rest of our lives as I see it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you'll run against the tide till you succeed, and then everyone will copy you and
[Amit Varma]: when copying you won't work. And by the way, that short attention span, as I must again
[Amit Varma]: say, it's, it's a misconception, but it's a misconception in an interesting way, in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that I would not divide people into categories of people with short attention
[Amit Varma]: spans and people with long attention spans. I would simply say that we all contain multitudes,
[Amit Varma]: right? So there are times many times where I have a short attention span. But there are
[Amit Varma]: times where I want to really dig in deep, I'm open to the immersive experience, when
[Amit Varma]: I have that long attention span. And it really depends on the incentives you give me to shift
[Amit Varma]: from oneself to the other. And I think the more good content and the more rewarding content
[Amit Varma]: there is out there, it can really help like I'm sure there might be someone who loves
[Amit Varma]: history but thinks he has a short attention span, and then listens to say Dan Collins
[Amit Varma]: Hardcore History where every episode is five hours, and then they are changed forever,
[Amit Varma]: you can kind of shift between them. Before we get back to tracing your personal journey,
[Amit Varma]: and this is a digressive show. So it's a feature, not a bug that we move all around the place.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get back to your personal journey, a general question on journalism, which is
[Amit Varma]: that it's my sense, and I know you agree with me, and you've just kind of elaborated on
[Amit Varma]: a number of other criticisms of mainstream media today. But it's my sense that over the
[Amit Varma]: last 20 years, a way in which as consumers, we discover media, filter media, consume media
[Amit Varma]: has changed completely. And mainstream organizations haven't figured this out at all. Now, you've
[Amit Varma]: been someone who's been the editorial head of mainstream organizations, editor of midday
[Amit Varma]: and editor at Times of India. If you were in one of those organizations today, like
[Amit Varma]: what I see in those organizations is that there is this desperate thirst to find the
[Amit Varma]: latest Twitter trend and do a story on it. Find what Republic TV is screaming about and
[Amit Varma]: do a story on it. And it's just become that race to the bottom, that race to cater to
[Amit Varma]: what is immediate. Now, we know that there is more happening there in terms of how we
[Amit Varma]: are consuming things, right? So, if you were running one of those companies today, if TOI
[Amit Varma]: was to say, make you the editor, which would be a great idea and say, okay, Ayaz, build
[Amit Varma]: a Times of India for the year 2035 and start now, you know, what are the things that you
[Amit Varma]: would do? What comes to mind?
[Guest]: So I would, you know, first of all, I would look at hiring people who are, you know, less
[Guest]: conditioned to just thinking along very structured patterns, because that has really been hit
[Guest]: for the sakes. You know, I think, partly the problem is of the, for instance, a newspaper,
[Guest]: the cycle of the paper is a problem. Today, news is consumed 24 by 7 into 365. So, a paper
[Guest]: which is put to bed at 12, 11, 11.30, 12 midnight around that time, and comes next morning to
[Guest]: your house at 6.37. In six and a half hours, a lot has happened, which you're not going
[Guest]: to find available. While when you switch on your cell phone, you'll have these alerts
[Guest]: which are already there on your phone saying, you know, news breaks and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And you always get this feeling or the sense that I'm a little cheated. You know, I haven't
[Guest]: got the, why am I reading the newspaper, if I'm going to get no information as to what
[Guest]: has happened in the last six, six and a half, seven hours. So the need for instant gratification
[Guest]: and consumption of news has completely defined how one consumes news. And therefore, newspapers
[Guest]: in that sense are not fulfilling that need. Where newspapers can fulfil, what need can
[Guest]: they fulfil? They can be far more explanatory, they can be far more analytical, very more
[Guest]: features driven, I think, very good interviews with, you know, relevant people. But where
[Guest]: the instant news is concerned, I think they are, it's gone, you know, it's history. Including
[Guest]: even television, you know, you had a 9pm show, is not as fulfilling as a Twitter update,
[Guest]: which comes to me, I mean, Twitter is your fastest source of news as of now. And therefore,
[Guest]: you always will feel that everything else is behind times. So if I have to look at a
[Guest]: creating a media setup heading into 2035, say, first of all, it has to be multimedia,
[Guest]: it can't be one. And how one dovetails into the other, how, you know, they kind of intertwine
[Guest]: and then they end up, they blend all kinds of functions and reach the final consumer
[Guest]: or the consumer finally, is really the challenge. And how do you reach out using a mix of social
[Guest]: media plus old format media, radio and television? Not everybody has all these attributes available
[Guest]: in a media organisation. Those which are only dependent on newspapers, I think are going
[Guest]: to be less and less relevant as time goes by. I mean, you know, I mean, I spend a lot
[Guest]: of time in Alibaug, where I don't get the newspaper. By the time the newspaper comes
[Guest]: to my house at 9.30, 10, I don't want it. I've already read all the newspapers on my
[Guest]: mobile or on my laptop. In Bombay, when I'm in Mumbai, I do get the newspapers at home.
[Guest]: The good thing about newspapers still is that if you're getting them delivered to your house,
[Guest]: you don't stop them because you don't even know when the guy delivered it, it's there,
[Guest]: it's fine. And there's also a certain sense of, you know, psychological dependency that
[Guest]: everything is right with the world, my newspapers come to me at 6.30. But going ahead, I think
[Guest]: that media organisations will have to seriously look at how they reach the formats, not one
[Guest]: format, the formats in which they reach the consumer because all of us are consuming multimedia,
[Guest]: the experience is multimedia. You know, you might watch the match. If you're watching
[Guest]: a cricket match, you might watch the pre-run session on TV. You have to step out, you'll
[Guest]: keep updating yourself on what's happening on the score on the cell phone, you suddenly
[Guest]: find there's an alert that somebody's reached a century or taken a hat trick, you'll immediately
[Guest]: search on your cell phone if there is a highlights package, which is 30 seconds or 40 seconds,
[Guest]: which tells you what has happened. So you don't want to be behind in terms of knowledge
[Guest]: and information than anybody else. Also, we are social animals, you reach your destination,
[Guest]: you meet your colleague or your friend or girlfriend or whatever, and there has to be
[Guest]: some conversation. You know, if some political leader has been arrested, you know, immediately
[Guest]: that becomes a opening of a conversation or a dialogue. I say you can't be, you know,
[Guest]: I don't know about this at all. It can happen, it happens all the time, but you don't want
[Guest]: to be in that situation. In today's day and age, the way we consume media, we want to
[Guest]: be on top of the situation. So for that, I think news organizations or media houses will
[Guest]: have to be, I mean, electric heeled into gathering information and disseminating it. It has to
[Guest]: be almost a, you know, simultaneous process. It comes in and it goes out. The swiftness,
[Guest]: the speed and the rapidity and exercising those controls, you know, if you're a media
[Guest]: organization. If I'm an independent, as they call an independent journalist who's on Twitter,
[Guest]: look, we are talking here, an accident takes place on the road where your apartment is
[Guest]: located and somebody with a cell phone is the first to capture it on camera and put
[Guest]: it on Twitter. By the time the news organization reporters come, it'll be three hours, two
[Guest]: hours, one hour, we don't know. The news is already...
[Amit Varma]: Maybe like four different narratives about it. Doctored videos from Bangladesh purporting
[Amit Varma]: to be this location.
[Guest]: And if you want the credibility of your organization or the brand value of organization to carry
[Guest]: your, the gravitas of your news gathering through, then you have to be, I think speed
[Guest]: is now becoming of the essence.
[Amit Varma]: The sort of counterpoint to this is like, of course, I think this might be one of those
[Amit Varma]: cases where I think, was it Naipaul who famously said or Churchill who famously said that whatever
[Amit Varma]: you say of India, the opposite is also true. And here I would say that, yeah, you know,
[Amit Varma]: speed being of the essence is of course there because information is a commodity. If you
[Amit Varma]: aren't giving it immediately, then it's kind of redundant. The person already knows. But
[Amit Varma]: the other way is that there also, I think, needs to be a tariff in our coverage. I produce
[Amit Varma]: this other show called Brave New World hosted by Vasant Dhar where he chatted with Jonathan
[Amit Varma]: Hyde and Jonathan Hyde made a great observation there. He said that, listen, you might think
[Amit Varma]: that we are in a world where all the information from all of human history is there at our
[Amit Varma]: disposal, right? But the truth is that most people are consuming at this very moment,
[Amit Varma]: what was produced in the last three days. The entirety of our consumption is something
[Amit Varma]: that was produced in the last three days. And therefore, what we have are people who
[Amit Varma]: are all the time buffeted by information, but always shallow, always ignorant, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and which is why your book, by the way, is such a fine service, because, yeah, I've just
[Amit Varma]: been through that 50 or 75 years. Yeah, and it's and it's fascinating. And I and I want
[Amit Varma]: people to pick up your book not to kind of skim through it while they're doing five other
[Amit Varma]: things, but sit back quietly and read it and immerse themselves in it, which I think they
[Amit Varma]: will, because I think there's a hunger for that too.
[Guest]: So I've tried to create a narrative, which is fine. What you're saying is right. But
[Guest]: I think both things happen simultaneously. For instance, you know, I love to read the
[Guest]: Wisden Almanac. It comes once a year. And I make sure that I get it and I read it like
[Guest]: from cover to cover. You know, and it's a periodical, it comes, but it doesn't mean
[Guest]: I stop consuming cricket coverage otherwise, or any other coverage. So both things work
[Guest]: simultaneously. But in in saying that I savour Wisden Cricket Almanac, I don't want to be
[Guest]: left behind on my current, you know, information, those gaps to be met. You know, I can't say
[Guest]: it really doesn't matter if I don't get that information, because I can wait a year later
[Guest]: and find out what really happened. So Wisden will give you a great perspective on everything
[Guest]: that has happened in the preceding year. But if I'm not, you know, with it, while things
[Guest]: are unfolding, and, you know, news, as they say, newspapers is history on the run, you
[Guest]: know, and it keeps getting revised all the time, a lot of stories get junked. We don't
[Guest]: even know what happens to those stories, you know, what is today's scoop might be in the
[Guest]: dustbin tomorrow. Because the effective follow up has shown that it was rubbish, or there's
[Guest]: not been any follow up, or actually, it was a trifling, which is played up, these things
[Guest]: happen. But if I'm not in that loop, then I might feel a little left behind, or a lot
[Guest]: left behind by a lot. So it also depends on the temperament, the age group, the social
[Guest]: milieu that you're in, all of that matters. The consumption of media is not straight laced,
[Guest]: you know, it's very, very, very kaleidoscopic. You know, all kinds of people look for different
[Guest]: things from what they want from the world, what they expect from the media.
[Amit Varma]: And the delightful thing is, it's an expanding kaleidoscope, like the problem with media
[Amit Varma]: houses now is that the future is unknown unknowns. It's not even known unknowns. You know that
[Amit Varma]: there's a problem, you know what the problem is, so you put a team, you solve it. But here
[Amit Varma]: you don't even know what it's going to look like tomorrow. And just for those of my readers
[Amit Varma]: who might not have heard of the Wizarding Cricketers, Almanac, I'll quickly explain
[Amit Varma]: what it is. Back in the day, there's this, you know, revered British company called Wisden,
[Amit Varma]: which used to, which still brings out something called the Wizarding Cricketers Almanac, which
[Amit Varma]: comes every year, which basically has all the scorecards of the year and all the info
[Amit Varma]: of the year. And you can read that on, you know, December 31st. And by the end of it,
[Amit Varma]: you'll know everything that happened that year. It's a fat book. All cricket writers
[Amit Varma]: aspire to writing for it. I finally did in, I wrote for a couple of those editions. And
[Amit Varma]: then my byline, this is an amusing story. Our mutual friend Anand Vasu, I think complained
[Amit Varma]: to me once, that he wrote for them a year after me. And they were just going by alphabetical
[Amit Varma]: order and Indian writer with A. So instead of putting on a piece that he wrote, they
[Amit Varma]: accidentally put my byline somehow. And I never even knew. So poor Anand was really
[Unknown]: upset that, yeah, Wisden.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's in the Bible. You don't find a mention in the Bible. That's terrible.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. So I can imagine the shock and horror when he got the copy and he went to
[Guest]: the hospital. And also, you know, Wisden is still, he's got a very lofty, you know.
[Guest]: It's like the MCC of cricket journalism.
[Guest]: But also what has changed in cricket writing, especially, but in sports writing by and large
[Guest]: is that the internet gives you access to information that, you know, at the click of a mouse. While
[Guest]: earlier, I mean, when I started writing on cricket, I used to maintain a scorecard in
[Guest]: the press box, you know, and if somebody hit a four, then you put, you write down the number
[Guest]: four, and then you describe elegant cover drive by so and so. So it's that when you
[Guest]: wrote your story, you remembered it, you know. Nowadays, nobody takes notes. It's all available
[Guest]: on, you might take notes sparingly, just to keep yourself, you know, filled in as to when
[Guest]: you write your story, what all you should focus on. You don't have to scurry around
[Guest]: looking for, making associations with the past because it's all available at the click
[Guest]: of a mouse. You know, if I have to, somebody, Veeru Sehwag zits a triple hundred in, in
[Guest]: the first triple hundred that he's made in 2005 against Pakistan, and the first Indian
[Guest]: to do it ever. Now, where do I run around trying to find out who all have made triple
[Guest]: hundreds, how many balls, how many fours, it's all available. So there is a certain
[Guest]: ease of gathering information which has happened, but it also creates its own complication because
[Guest]: there's so much of it that you have to be really smart in how you select the information.
[Amit Varma]: Also, I remember one of the things that troubled me when I started touring around cricket first
[Amit Varma]: with Wisden and then with Crickinfo. And again, to complete that almanac story, Wisden came
[Amit Varma]: to India in 2001 with a magazine called Wisden Cricket Monthly, which I joined. We started
[Amit Varma]: a website called Wisden.com which bought Crickinfo and subsequently Crickinfo was bought by ESPN
[Amit Varma]: and then another Wisden.com, which was out of the picture, then made a comeback later.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a very complicated story. But one of the things I remember traveling to test
[Amit Varma]: matches all over the place is that in the press box, and this really disturbed me when
[Amit Varma]: I first saw this, in the press box, nobody would watch the cricket. Yeah, because they
[Amit Varma]: know that you will get all the information. You won't get all the information anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm watching every ball, right? I'm soaking it in also partly because I'm a new writer
[Amit Varma]: at that time. And it's really exciting for me. But nobody would watch the cricket. And
[Amit Varma]: I would be like, what kind of press box is this? You know, and, you know, once I once
[Amit Varma]: in Mohali, I noticed one guy sitting behind me very intently watching every ball, taking
[Amit Varma]: notes, constantly typing things. And I was damn impressed. And then the next day, I think
[Amit Varma]: he was either arrested or thrown out of the press box because he was actually working
[Amit Varma]: for a bookie syndicate. Oh, and he was because the image on TV comes a couple of split seconds,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he was quickly feeding the information, you know, in a split second hitting whatever
[Amit Varma]: button he has to hit. So it was really amusing. And I remember I was very pissed off because
[Amit Varma]: I had had to fight like a maniac to get my press pass for that particular test match.
[Amit Varma]: In those days, these, you know, Crickinfo was a new kid on the block. And these guys
[Guest]: would keep troubling us. Yeah. And what is Crickinfo? Yeah, so I had to run around for
[Amit Varma]: a whole day to get a press pass. And this guy, this Firang guy got just got it immediately
[Guest]: very easily. Yeah. And then he's doing this thing, but he was watching every ball.
[Guest]: So there are best practices and there are not such good practices of, you know, covering
[Guest]: an event. I've seen people doze off in the press box and like doze off, doze off and
[Guest]: snore and wake up two hours later, not having watched the match for that period. And then,
[Guest]: of course, they're writing their stories and running around trying to get information.
[Guest]: You know, ultimately, if it's stringing together 8-10 paras or 15 paras, that's not the challenge.
[Guest]: Anybody with even basic skills can do it, you know. But it's how you watch the match
[Guest]: and what you There's a sense of enjoyment or even sometimes non-enjoyment which might
[Guest]: come through, you know. But the writing should be enjoyable. I think it makes a difference
[Amit Varma]: over the years. Yes. Like, you know, I might watch a match intently and you might not.
[Amit Varma]: And we could write reports which are very similar. But over the years, the person who's
[Amit Varma]: watching the match intently will just have greater, deeper insight.
[Guest]: This is my 43rd year in journalism and in sports writing. So it's not that I've watched
[Guest]: every match with the same intensity. It can happen. Sometimes there's such a dull passage
[Guest]: of play. And, you know, you walk out of the press box, there's some guys talking and you
[Guest]: get into a debate on some other subject, you know. And then it's been half an hour, 45
[Guest]: minutes, you go back in and you pick up the threads and But interestingly, you mention
[Guest]: about this guy, somebody sitting there and taking notes. So one of my It's not about
[Guest]: a bookie. One of my earliest My earliest experience of being on tour was in Pakistan.
[Guest]: So we were in the press box at various grounds, Lahore, Karachi, Faisalabad, part of the Ding
[Guest]: Bang which was, you know And there must have been maybe about eight, nine journalists
[Guest]: from India, not 80, 90 as it is today. India, Pakistan would be 80, 90 journalists otherwise.
[Guest]: And there would be a guy constantly in the press box who was meeting all of us every
[Guest]: day and being, you know, more, like, friendlier than one would expect. And then suddenly this
[Guest]: buzz went around in the Amongst us, amongst the Indian journalists. Ye hai kaun? Nobody
[Guest]: seemed to know who he was. No Pakistani journalist knew who he was. You know, most of the Pakistani
[Guest]: journalists, we knew which papers Nobody knew who the hell he was. Then somebody said,
[Guest]: ye intelligence ka aadmi hai. He's keeping a watch on all the Indian journalists. So
[Guest]: that became Then we started kind of distancing ourselves, you know, from him. But he used
[Guest]: to be there every match. And finally, one fine day, we found that he had stopped coming
[Guest]: one match. So, where has he gone? We all got a little perplexed. Where the hell has he
[Guest]: gone? So, we found out from the guys who were in charge of the press box. And I said, this
[Guest]: guy used to be there, over here. He's no longer to be seen. He's saying, haan usko
[Guest]: hum log ne bhaar phek diya. Kya ho gaya? He never had a pass. He used to always say, I'm
[Guest]: an Indian journalist and come along into the press box. Now, you know, whether he was from
[Guest]: the intelligence or not, I have no idea. But I'm saying these kind of crazy things happen
[Guest]: in press boxes. Maybe he was just a guy who See, in those days there was very little security.
[Guest]: It wasn't as sanitized and sterilized, you know, the environment as it is now. So, people
[Guest]: used to hop in and out of press boxes. And we thought he's one of the Pakistani journalists.
[Guest]: Then we found that he's not a Pakistani journalist. Then, is he an ISI or some other
[Guest]: agent, some, you know, intelligence fellow? But he wasn't that. He was some vagabond
[Guest]: who was getting the best seat in the town, best seat in the match, come and sit in the
[Guest]: press box. Tell everybody he's part of the Indian journalist team and whenever he was
[Guest]: with us, say he's with the Pakistanis. Something like that.
[Guest]: Mr. Natwarlal.
[Amit Varma]: Must have kind of honed his skills gate crashing weddings and this is sort of
[Guest]: It's not funny, you know, the number of people who used to gate crash. Nowadays, it's far
[Guest]: more organized. Of course, in the other countries, like England and Australia, it was far more
[Guest]: regimented. You couldn't just, you know, the system of ticketing system for the press box
[Guest]: also was But even the West Indies, I went there in 1989, you'd find all kinds of people,
[Guest]: you know. The West Indies in that sense is much like India, you know, who you know, who's
[Amit Varma]: the guy who can let you in and stuff like that.
[Amit Varma]: I remember when I went to Pakistan in 2006 and I was covering that tour for The Guardian
[Amit Varma]: but also filing pieces for Crick Info, but also writing pieces for The Wall Street Journal.
[Amit Varma]: I did a couple of op-eds from there, I think. And I remember at one point, I went to on
[Amit Varma]: an off day from the cricket, I went to interview an economist and I went to his, you know,
[Amit Varma]: flashy bungalow and all that. And at one point during the conversation, he said that, I must
[Amit Varma]: tell you, Amit, you know, you called me up earlier and all of that, but I must tell you
[Amit Varma]: that my phone is tapped. So, I said, really, your phone is tapped? And he said, I must
[Amit Varma]: tell you another thing, Amit, your phone is also tapped. And I was like, what are you
[Unknown]: talking about? And he's saying, all of you bloody Indian journalists, they are listening
[Unknown]: to every word you say, which is incredibly likely.
[Amit Varma]: So I met a gentleman called Murali there, who was the Hindu correspondent in Islamabad.
[Amit Varma]: And Murali told me an interesting thing. He said that there, with regard to journalists,
[Amit Varma]: the two countries have a policy of exact reciprocation, in the sense that if a Pakistani journalist
[Amit Varma]: in New Delhi has his fridge stolen, the next day, the Indian journalist in Islamabad will
[Amit Varma]: have his fridge stolen. So it's the exact reciprocity and that's official policy.
[Guest]: Even at the diplomatic level, one undersecretary is sacked here, the next day, there's the
[Guest]: undersecretary who's sent back from either country. So it's a tit for tat spy versus
[Amit Varma]: spy situation from Mad Comics.
[Amit Varma]: Quite delightful. Even the India-Pakistan dynamic is something we must discuss as we
[Amit Varma]: go on to talking about cricket. But before that, we'll get back to talking about your
[Amit Varma]: personal journey. And before that, we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons, and now it is time to revive it. Only now,
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Ayaz Memon about his life about
[Amit Varma]: his journey about his wonderful new book Indian Innings. And in a sense, you know, I'd be
[Amit Varma]: perfectly happy to call this episode Ayaz Innings. I won't do that because that sounds
[Amit Varma]: weird. But let's go back to your personal life. You've discussed your sort of early
[Amit Varma]: love for cricket, you know, watch the match at the Brebon, you remember all the names,
[Amit Varma]: you remember the scorecard, you know, 71 is a big deal, you're reading K.N Prabhu and
[Amit Varma]: you know, all those inspiring reports come. From there, at this point in time, how do
[Amit Varma]: you see yourself? Like what what is your conception of yourself? Ki main yeh banunga? And how
[Amit Varma]: does that path veer towards cricket writing?
[Guest]: So Amit, I mean, if you're growing up in the 60s and 70s, there were not too many options
[Guest]: academically. When you look at what things are today, you have to be BA, BCom, BSc. If
[Guest]: you're doing graduation, if you had the stamina, and the financial stamina, also, you go on
[Guest]: to do your master's. Outside of that, the vocational courses were engineering, medicine
[Guest]: and so on, limited. You couldn't have also juxtapositions of curriculum, you know, you
[Guest]: couldn't do BSc with also literature, it was not possible. My father was a lawyer. And
[Guest]: there was a big demand in my kind of family group and all. When I was growing up, are
[Guest]: you going to be a lawyer? As it used to be in those in homes in those days. And that
[Guest]: kind of created this situation, whatever happens, I don't want to be a lawyer. You know, so
[Guest]: when I was in school, I thought I'll be an engineer. That was my hope and dream to be
[Amit Varma]: an engineer.
[Amit Varma]: That was your rebellion to be an engineer.
[Guest]: Yeah, that was my rebellion. And I look back, it was such a, you know, it was some such
[Guest]: a stupid decision. So, I got into science. In school also, I took science last two years,
[Guest]: senior Cambridge was the school finishing program, but into college and I took science
[Guest]: and I realised that to be an engineer, you had no trigonometry, you had no higher physics,
[Guest]: which was like, you know, facing Malcolm Marshall's bouncers, as it turned out. And I was not
[Guest]: equipped at all to do engineering and whatever else. So, I switched and I did economics.
[Guest]: And I studied economics, I passed with honours just about, and then subsequently, and by
[Guest]: that time, my father had passed away. So, then I got into law. You know, ironically,
[Guest]: I got into law, I did my law from government law college. But by that time, I was consumed
[Guest]: by sport and cricket. And I was also interested in journalism. So, while I was studying, I
[Guest]: was doing, I think, my first or second year of law, yeah, first year, I joined a journalism
[Guest]: class in Xavier's College of Journalism. Evening classes, we used to have 6.30 to 8.30 or something
[Guest]: like that. And while I was there, there was an ex-basketball player from Western Railway
[Guest]: and I think he was also in the India Reserves, Javed Akhtar, who had also joined the Xavier's
[Guest]: class, Xavier's College, and he was working with Sportsweek. So, he said, we've got a
[Guest]: vacancy, why don't you join now? I said, you know, I'm doing law. And he said, you don't
[Guest]: like it? Six months later, if you're going for exams and all, don't do it. So, in 1979
[Guest]: is when I got into Sportsweek. That was my first brush with journalism, so to speak,
[Guest]: getting into the newsroom. And the first assignment which I got was to go and watch the Jubilee
[Guest]: match, India versus England, which was a memorable match in many ways. Vishwanath was the captain,
[Guest]: not Gavaskar.
[Guest]: And Mike Braley.
[Guest]: And Mike Braley. And, you know, Vishwanath, everybody remembers calling back Bob Taylor,
[Guest]: you know, catch, which the umpire upheld, catch behind. And Vishwanath consulted Kirmani.
[Guest]: Kirmani said no, and Bob Taylor was called back. And Bob Taylor and Botham had a long
[Guest]: partnership. And then, of course, Botham bowled us out twice, both innings. He was the best
[Guest]: all-rounder in the world then. And England won the match. But my job was to do what was
[Guest]: popularly known as side stories. Somebody else was doing the match report for Midday.
[Guest]: Midday was a very new newspaper then. It had started in 1979. There was a lot of excitement
[Guest]: in the small, meagre newsroom that Midday had in those days. It was a small paper, but
[Guest]: lots of fun. And then there was Sportsweek magazine, which was also from the same stable.
[Guest]: So I was doing side lights and side stories. But I got a place in the press box, which
[Guest]: is right behind the bowler's arm. And, you know, I had never seen a cricket match from
[Guest]: that vantage situation. And I immediately got a job offer from them. I had got a job
[Guest]: offer and I realized I'm being paid to watch cricket. And what could be better? So, you
[Guest]: know, law, the ambitions for pursuing a law degree went out of the window for a while.
[Guest]: I did resume it later and completed my graduation. But I said, this is like, you know, this is
[Guest]: the best thing that can happen to me. And I was being paid 350 rupees, but that really
[Guest]: didn't matter because I was there sitting behind the bowler's arm. And, you know, you
[Guest]: see if you're sitting in the press box, there's Dilip Sardesai who comes in or Bapu Nadkarni
[Guest]: or some of these old-timers. And if you were lucky in a domestic match, which we also,
[Guest]: you know, we'd go and attend, Gavaskar would come up and sit in what was the committee
[Guest]: box or the selector's box. The players' box was below the dressing room. And those days,
[Guest]: it was not as secure the environment. So, you could, you know, you could hop across
[Guest]: and say, I want to speak to so-and-so player and maybe you would get a chance that you
[Guest]: could do it. So, that kind of association with the game and the access just won me over.
[Guest]: And I said, whatever it is, this is what I'm going to do.
[Amit Varma]: Getting paid to do what you love is such an incredible privilege. You used the phrase
[Amit Varma]: when you were talking about how you studied economics, you said you could just about passed
[Amit Varma]: with honors, which sounds to me much like, you know, a batsman saying, I barely managed
[Amit Varma]: to reach my 200, what is just about passed with honors. But here's sort of my next question
[Amit Varma]: that today, if I want to be a cricket writer, say I'm 20 years old, I want to be a cricket
[Amit Varma]: writer. I have all the models in the world to emulate, to figure out who are my stylistic
[Amit Varma]: heroes, what are the best practices in journalism, and blah, blah, blah. I have this whole smorgasbord
[Amit Varma]: of influences which I can pick from. In your case, that would not have been the case. In
[Amit Varma]: the sense, okay, you're reading Prabhu and you're reading Hendrix and you're reading
[Amit Varma]: a handful of people, but it is a handful of people. How did you then form your conception
[Amit Varma]: of what good writing is? Like, what do you want to write? Like, what do you tell yourself?
[Amit Varma]: When you look back on your early self, was there a period of time before you found your
[Amit Varma]: own voice, so to say, or it just came naturally? How did your values sort of evolve in that
[Guest]: period of time?
[Guest]: No, I think what helped me, I did find my voice after a little while, you know. I mean,
[Guest]: as happens with everybody, you try and be more, you imagine what you are and you try
[Guest]: and be that. Well, that may not be your true voice, so to speak. And it comes with a little
[Guest]: experience and it comes with a little discipline as a writer. You get into a certain drill
[Guest]: in terms of information gathering and then, of course, how you articulate and express
[Guest]: it. That takes a little while, unless you're a born natural. That's a different matter.
[Guest]: But what helped me, I think, when I look back is, I read a lot about cricket and I was generally
[Guest]: very interested in books. And, you know, while I read a lot of fiction and etc., while growing
[Guest]: up in my teenage years, early 20s, I also read a lot of cricket, from the Cardus books
[Guest]: to Beyond the Boundary and so many others, including my cricketing years, Ajit Vadekar,
[Guest]: Tiger's Tale, Pathodi, Sunny Days when it first came out, 1976, I think. These were
[Guest]: all books that I consumed and it just made me so much more familiar with players and,
[Guest]: you know, their points of view and their lives and stuff. I was also a very avid follower
[Guest]: of cricket in the British Council Library. I would go every week, maybe twice a week
[Guest]: or thrice a week, just to read the British newspapers during their cricket season, their
[Guest]: summer, the English summer. Because that, you know, the British papers would have a
[Guest]: half-page story or a match report and some of the better-known writers one had got, come
[Guest]: to know of, would be there. The county scores, I would devour them, you know, rather than
[Guest]: wait for Playfair Cricket Annual with the, you know, the consolidated scores and all
[Guest]: to come, I would be always visiting British Council. And therefore, I developed a certain
[Guest]: liking for certain kinds of writers. You know, Alan Ross was one of those writers I really
[Guest]: enjoyed reading. Jack Fingalton.
[Guest]: I love Jack Fingalton.
[Guest]: Jack Fingalton was fabulous. There was Ray Robinson, whose style was very interesting
[Guest]: because he was not lyrical like a Prabhu or a Cardis, but he was very business-like, but
[Guest]: very factual. And he, you know, the expression was also very sound. And he, you know, as
[Guest]: they say, he would, each para you could, was leading into something more. And when you
[Guest]: read the whole piece, it gave you a very good comprehensive picture. There was no meandering,
[Guest]: you know, so he was somebody who I really enjoyed reading and obviously gave a lot more
[Guest]: about Australian cricket because he was an Aussie. So that's how I started. Even before
[Guest]: I became a journalist, I was, I had a fair collection of books in my house. And I used
[Guest]: to feel that Cardis is, when you're young, is your, almost everybody's ambition in the
[Guest]: English language. You know, Cardis, he thinks of himself as Cardis. That would be a jibe
[Guest]: that fellow journalists would say, you know, when you wrote a piece and they'd come next
[Guest]: day and dissect your report and say, apne aapko Cardis samajhta hai, you know, that
[Guest]: would be a kind of tutu-mema in the press box. But Cardis was not the only one. And
[Guest]: as, you know, as one keeps growing, I think there's, if I have to, and this is an advice
[Guest]: I still keep giving myself, but if I was a young writer starting today, I would say that
[Guest]: the more you read, the better you become. So irrespective of whether you found your
[Guest]: voice, you also want to know what other voices are saying. And that is only possible if you
[Guest]: keep reading. But if you blank yourself out saying, you know, I know my voice and I know
[Guest]: two other writers and that's all I'm interested in, I think you actually restrict yourself
[Guest]: and then may not necessarily grow in terms of enriching your own understanding of the
[Guest]: game or a situation or of a player, but also in what you send out subsequently to your
[Guest]: readers or, you know, those who follow you or your newspaper. So I think constant and
[Guest]: continuous reading is an absolute essential in my opinion. And you'll find that along
[Guest]: the way, if you're reasonably, you know, smart, get, take feedback, are not ego-driven, somebody
[Guest]: gives you sensible advice, you don't say, haha, kya bakwas, then you can, you hone your
[Guest]: skills along the way. There are some things that become obsolete, you know, some expressions
[Guest]: that become obsolete. I read a very interesting thing on Twitter the other day, somebody raised
[Guest]: the issue, should we use the in sport and tagged me along. Shouldn't the word suicidal
[Guest]: stroke be banned, given the way mental health has become an issue? Should we be actually
[Guest]: saying this is part of the game? It's an interesting thought. So, I don't know, I haven't kind
[Guest]: of put my mind to it, but I'm saying that if you're not stimulated by what else is happening
[Guest]: around you, then you will not necessarily grow to full potential. I think that's what
[Guest]: is important for every, in any field, I would imagine that's true, you know, whether you're
[Guest]: writing on sport or medicine or politics or business or entertainment, the more you read,
[Guest]: and especially the more you read of people who've, who set a certain benchmark, it just
[Guest]: makes that, it makes the whole process that much more interesting.
[Amit Varma]: A number of things to react to. First of all, I love Ray Robinson as well. And in fact,
[Amit Varma]: for readers who want to get a sampler of all these writers, Ramchandra Guha had this lovely
[Amit Varma]: collection out called, I think, The Picketer Book of Cricket Writing a few years ago, which
[Amit Varma]: had pieces by Fingleton, Robinson, Cardus, all of these guys. And what you said about
[Amit Varma]: the way Robinson used paragraphs, reminds me of a metaphor that one of the participants
[Amit Varma]: in one of my courses used when we were chatting about the use of paragraphs. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: to elaborate upon the way I was explaining them, he said that he could think of paragraphs
[Amit Varma]: like bogeys in a train. So yes, yes, you have the engine driving it forward, but each bogey
[Amit Varma]: plays a role and they're all connected. That's kind of what it is. And regarding what you
[Amit Varma]: said about reading more, it's almost uncanny because one, that is the advice I constantly
[Amit Varma]: keep drumming into. In fact, if you're listening to this and you're interested in improving
[Amit Varma]: your writing, the one way to do it is just read, read, read. I get questions about how
[Amit Varma]: do I improve my vocabulary, my grammar? How do I learn how to structure a piece? How do
[Amit Varma]: I find my voice? The answer to everything is read. And I can't agree more with what
[Amit Varma]: you said about finding your voice because I think it's analogous in some ways to how
[Amit Varma]: babies learn to speak. How do you learn to speak? You listen to all the voices around
[Amit Varma]: you and eventually you speak in your own way and eventually you use words in your own way.
[Amit Varma]: But everything that you have, you pick up from around you and that's how you learn.
[Amit Varma]: So there's just no substitute for reading voraciously. And I even say that be indiscriminate
[Amit Varma]: about reading. I don't have patience with people who say that some books are worth reading
[Amit Varma]: and other books are rubbish. I think any book that grabs your attention, that keeps your
[Amit Varma]: attention is doing something right and you will imbibe it by osmosis. Now I want to ask
[Amit Varma]: you a question picking up on something that you said in this context, but I want to take
[Amit Varma]: it to another context where you spoke about have the humility to take advice and feedback
[Amit Varma]: from others. And I say this to my writing students with the metaphor of Virat Kohli.
[Amit Varma]: Where I say that listen, Virat Kohli's public image is what? That he's a brash, arrogant
[Amit Varma]: young man. But nobody who achieves that level of excellence does that without having extreme
[Amit Varma]: humility when they are practicing their craft. That when he is spending those thousands of
[Amit Varma]: hours in the nets, he's not focusing on what he's doing right. He's focusing on what he's
[Amit Varma]: doing wrong. If he's getting out a particular way, is there an issue with the footwork?
[Amit Varma]: Is there an issue with the balance? You spend thousands of hours, your coach will tell you
[Amit Varma]: this. Other people will tell you this. Of course, in cricket, unlike in writing, you
[Amit Varma]: get immediate feedback on whether you're doing something right or wrong. In writing, you
[Amit Varma]: can do the wrong thing for years and delude yourself into thinking it's okay. But in cricket,
[Amit Varma]: you get that immediate feedback. So my question to you is this that my thesis is that to excel
[Amit Varma]: in anything, and you'd be able to answer this in the context of cricket, at least in that
[Amit Varma]: particular domain where you're excelling, you have to have extreme humility. You can
[Amit Varma]: be arrogant in another domain. But in that particular domain, you've got to be extremely
[Guest]: humble.
[Guest]: Unless you shut your mind out, you know, for instance, I mean, what may happen, and I've
[Guest]: seen it happen, so I won't pull my punches here. So you get access to the press box,
[Guest]: a World Cup, or a Test match, and you're 24, 25, 23, whatever it is. And you say that I'm,
[Guest]: you tell yourself, I'm watching this match, it's maybe a World Cup final, and what more
[Guest]: do I need to achieve, so to speak, in terms of an experience? This is it. And you shut
[Guest]: yourself out from other influences. And just to give you an example, you may stop reading
[Guest]: because you say, why should I read, I'm watching. And whatever I've read is good enough to see
[Guest]: me through because then I'm going to speak to players and get quotes and stories, my
[Guest]: editor will tell me, whatever, I'll get advice, I'm speaking to colleagues. I think that's
[Guest]: narrowing rather than broadening your horizon. And I would go venture further, I'd say apart
[Guest]: from cricket books, which is your stock in trade, that is something that you must read,
[Guest]: or books on sport. But in fact, you must read beyond sports also, you know, to enrich your
[Guest]: own understanding, not just of the sport, but also of life. You know, the power of expression
[Guest]: of some writers who are not writing on sport may be so influential, that it will influence
[Guest]: your sports writing to get better. So I think that is something that needs to be done. And
[Guest]: that only comes through humility. And humility is, as you mentioned, that when Virat Kohli
[Guest]: takes the field, he can't be, you know, looking down, not looking the opponent squarely in
[Guest]: the eye and saying, I'm very, very humble soul. And therefore, he has to act cocky on
[Guest]: the field. And that's also his personality. But he is actually very smart and very, in
[Guest]: many, you know, he handles his own professional life as a cricketer with a great degree of
[Guest]: humility. Otherwise, he's brought about a paradigm shift in the aspect of fitness. The
[Guest]: Indian team has never been more athletic. And that's because the captain has set the
[Guest]: benchmark. I remember we were in, I was in Colombo, 2015. He had just become captain.
[Guest]: Dhoni had given up the captaincy. And, you know, so they lost the first test against
[Guest]: Sri Lanka, won the next one in Colombo. And there was a little luncheon arranged by, Shastri
[Guest]: was the coach and he said, captain will meet. So seven, eight of us went there for lunch.
[Guest]: And Virat, we were called at about 12.30 and Virat didn't turn up till about 1.15, 1.30.
[Guest]: So I asked Ravi, I said, what the hell is happening? Where is he? So he said, no, he's
[Guest]: in the gym. So I said, OK, but where are the others? He said, if he's in the gym, how can
[Guest]: the others be out? So he had set that example because, and very early in his captaincy,
[Guest]: you know, role as a captain, that we need to all get fit. It's not that he held them
[Guest]: back physically, but if you set an example and the others follow, then, you know, it
[Guest]: just makes a difference to the team. So it doesn't mean that, see, look, when you look
[Guest]: at sport or in cricket, there are more failures than successes, even for the greatest of players.
[Guest]: If Tendulkar has played, you know, 200 matches or whatever it is, and so many more innings,
[Guest]: it's not that he scored a 100 every time. He's made 51 test 100s. But the number of
[Guest]: times he's not made 100 or even a 50 is far greater than the number of times he's made
[Guest]: 50-plus scores, you know. So it's a question of consistency over a period of time which
[Guest]: sets you apart from the, you know, average Joe as a cricketer who's there, the special
[Guest]: players. It's what you do, how you, how often you do it, that marks you out as special.
[Guest]: And that, to reach that status, you also, you have to be consistently improving and
[Guest]: learning. This is a, and sport can be very cruel, very punishing because you are aging.
[Guest]: So there is this age at which you start, at which you peak, and then there's a plateau
[Guest]: and then it is downhill. And how do you arrest that downhill from being, you know, rapid?
[Guest]: Your reflexes go. You may be jaded. You may be mentally fatigued. That's when you dig
[Guest]: into your reserves and come up. And there are lessons that you learned early in life
[Guest]: that you bring into play. And there's a lot that happens even with, I take that as an
[Guest]: example even for writing. I'm still writing articles and columns. I'm doing other stuff.
[Guest]: I'm not, you know, I feel that there's still some more to learn. But I also go back to
[Guest]: my earliest learn. What are the drills you learn to get an interesting insight into a
[Guest]: player or a story and how do you do it? So I keep asking myself, is there a way I can
[Guest]: do it better? And I think that's important, because otherwise, it's like being there,
[Guest]: done that, you know, and then it can lead to actually being bored. You can just hang
[Amit Varma]: on to a job rather than enjoy it.
[Amit Varma]: What you said about that arc of a sports person's life, that, you know, you're very good, you're
[Amit Varma]: very talented, you work hard, but at some point, you peak and then it's all downhill.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that, you know, unlike our careers, necessarily, where we can hopefully
[Amit Varma]: keep getting better, a sports person's career always ends in tragedy, where they are not
[Amit Varma]: what they used to be. And that can, at one level become difficult to deal with. And how
[Amit Varma]: you respond to that can really vary on a lot of factors. So in your time dealing with,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so many cricketers who are personal friends, so many cricketers who have kind
[Amit Varma]: of gone through these ups and downs, some of these rounds may have been sudden, some
[Amit Varma]: of them may have been gradual, but they always then have to mentally recalibrate who they
[Amit Varma]: are and what they can do in their place in the world and the place of cricket in their
[Guest]: lives.
[Guest]: So Amit, I think retirement or when you're approaching the end, it can be quite a terrifying
[Guest]: period for the, you know, the performing artists, in a sense. Imagine if you're a trapeze artist
[Guest]: and, you know, your shelf life is, for a trapeze artist, maybe seven, eight, nine years. You
[Guest]: know, in a cricketer's career, it may be, you can stretch it to 20 years, but still
[Guest]: there has to be an end. And you're actually in the peak of your prime, you're in the prime
[Guest]: of your life, if you're 38, 37, 40, you know, at best, say. And then what do you do? The
[Guest]: thought of not doing what you've done for 20 years can create a lot of, you know, turmoil
[Guest]: within the person. And therefore, a lot of people delay their retirement till they are
[Guest]: dumped or they start flopping. And then there's a lot of remorse and regret associated with
[Guest]: it, which is either publicly expressed or not, but they go through, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: some of them can go through very torrid times personally in their own lives. There's also
[Guest]: this whole, it's a cliche, but it's there, you know, quit when you're at the top. But
[Guest]: it's easier said than done. When you're at the top, why do you quit? Why should you,
[Guest]: you know? And especially in the old days, where there wasn't much financial reward or
[Guest]: financial security, the financial security is there now. The insecurity is about what
[Guest]: do I do with myself after I've quit? And a lot of it is the conditioning. You're used
[Guest]: to fame, you're used to popularity, you're used to adulation, all that going. It's not
[Guest]: very different from film stars in that sense, at least for cricketers in the Indian or the
[Guest]: subcontinent, you know, the kind of larger-than-life persona they occupy. So that is something
[Guest]: that also, I think, is deserving of attention when, you know, mentoring has become so big
[Guest]: now. How to handle money, how to handle fame and how to handle retirement as it approaches
[Guest]: is something that needs to be aggressively taught, I think, especially when in a country
[Guest]: like India, where there's so much competition. You know, I know, we all know players now
[Guest]: who are, especially in the IPL. The IPL has got many pluses to it, as we know. There are
[Guest]: some downsides that it brings you into the limelight suddenly. You have two bad seasons
[Guest]: and you're out of sight, you know? You may lose your place in the India team. What hurts
[Guest]: even more is you lost your place in the IPL team. You've been dumped by a franchise. Your
[Guest]: money earnings is also gone, your place in the national team is gone, and you're left
[Guest]: with nothing to clutch on to, you know, hang on to. So these are areas that I think that
[Guest]: it's not all as rosy as it appears from the outside. One has to be cognizant of what they
[Guest]: go through. For writers, it's certainly not the case. You know, we've got a lifetime that
[Guest]: one can practice your craft or your vocation. There's no retirement age now. You can lose
[Guest]: a job, but you don't need to stop writing or being a commentator or doing a podcast
[Guest]: or whatever. So in that sense, it's a far more extended lifestyle. The only thing which
[Guest]: people like us need to guard against is, you know, sense of deja vu, one more match, you
[Amit Varma]: know?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I'm reminded by what you said of this anecdote. I think it's about Bradman
[Amit Varma]: and I forget the exact, the gist of it is this, that in the 1970s, Bradman is asked
[Amit Varma]: that if you played these Western Indian quicks, what would your average against them would
[Amit Varma]: be? And he said, it would be about 60 or 70. And they said, oh, okay, that low. And Bradman
[Guest]: said, what do you expect? I'm 80 years old.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: Whatever that is.
[Guest]: But, you know, just reminding you just about Bradman. So, you know, this sense of invincibility
[Guest]: in sport is such a myth. You know, the greatest are not invincible. Bradman made zero in his
[Guest]: last test innings. Had he made four, he would have finished with 100 of, average of 100.
[Guest]: So, even the great Bradman, now there's all kinds of stories that he was, he got so emotional
[Guest]: that there were tears that welled up in his eye and therefore, he lost sight of Eric Holley's
[Guest]: leg break or googly or whatever it was and got bold.
[Guest]: It's also to me, a sign of mortality, you know, that every sports person, whoever it
[Guest]: may be, whether it's a Tiger Woods or a Garfield Sobers or a Don Bradman or Pelly or, you know,
[Guest]: Pelly can miss the easiest of goals. It can happen.
[Amit Varma]: And I vaguely remember in Bradman's case when Holley's bowled him for zero, one of his ex-teammates
[Amit Varma]: in the commentary box, I think probably Fingleton, two of his teammates were in the commentary
[Amit Varma]: box and they turned to each other and they laughed in delight. And that also leads to
[Amit Varma]: the question that if that happens, what have you achieved really? You know, which is another
[Amit Varma]: kind of question. No, but the film star metaphor breaks down here because SRK can still play
[Amit Varma]: a teenager in his 50s, but cricketers can have done.
[Guest]: Also more difficult for a sports person compared, I mean, I did mention about performing artists,
[Guest]: but if it's Amitabh Bachchan or Shah Rukh Khan, Salman or whoever, but you can have
[Guest]: multiple retakes. You can have 50 retakes till you get it right. You can go and watch
[Guest]: the video monitor and say, look, I can do it differently. I can do it better and probably
[Guest]: do it better. But for a sports person, you miss a penalty, you're gone.
[Guest]: Unless you're WG Gray, sir. It's that famous story about how an umpire gave him out and
[Guest]: he stayed there and the umpire said, have they come to see you raise your finger or
[Amit Varma]: have they come to see me bat? So here's another question that, you know, like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, if someone was to say to either you or me that, hey guys, like the cliche goes, quit
[Amit Varma]: when they ask why instead of why not, or, you know, quit when you're at the top, as
[Amit Varma]: you just said, we would just laugh. Buzz off. Yeah. Buzz off, my top is yet to come. Two,
[Amit Varma]: even if I feel my powers are declining, as long as I'm enjoying writing, I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: keep writing. I think that there is this pressure that is sometimes put on sports people where
[Amit Varma]: we focus on their legacies more than they themselves do. Like the word legacy itself.
[Amit Varma]: I don't even know what it means or why anyone should give a damn about it. I imagine somebody
[Amit Varma]: starts playing a sport. It's because they love it. Of course, you know, and they should
[Amit Varma]: play till they love it. And even if they are on a decline, like maybe Roger Federer today,
[Amit Varma]: and he says, no, I love it. I want to play. I don't care if I'm not winning two grand
[Amit Varma]: slams a year, I want to play. We should respect that, you know.
[Guest]: But that's easier than easier in individual sport than in a team sport, you know, because
[Guest]: team sport you're selected. Roger Federer can decide he wants to play and maybe lose
[Guest]: in the first round and keep playing. That's fine. But in a team sport, somebody else is
[Guest]: selecting you and the impact you have or the influence you have on the team, or not, you
[Guest]: may have a debilitating influence on the team. So then you're chucked out. So I think that,
[Guest]: you know, different sports will have different yardsticks. But you're right. You can't decide
[Guest]: on your legacy at the start of your career, because you'll get so consumed by that, you
[Guest]: know, and weighed down that you might have nothing to show for it. Forget about legacy,
[Guest]: you know. I mean, there are players who came meteoric rise and then gone. So there's no
[Guest]: legacy that has been left behind barring the first couple of years. Legacy comes with the
[Guest]: body of work that is voluminous. And its impact is not just about averages alone. In the case
[Guest]: of cricket, it can. Averages can mean a heck of a lot. But also in the impact. I mean,
[Guest]: Virendra Sehwag's, in my opinion, Virendra Sehwag's legacy is fabulous. His average may
[Guest]: not be in the 50s. He's 49-something, just about touching 50. But with a few more knockouts,
[Guest]: he'd have been 50-plus. But the impact he had on international cricket, apart from Indian
[Guest]: cricket, the way he would win matches, the fear he would create in opposing bowlers is
[Guest]: something that, you know, it's a fabulous legacy. And it was such a conundrum to see
[Guest]: a Virendra Sehwag kind of an opener in Indian cricket. You know, normally you would associate
[Guest]: these buccaneering types with an Aussie or maybe a West Indian, not even an Englishman.
[Guest]: Maybe a madcap Pakistani batsman. I mean, I sometimes think the best opening pair in
[Guest]: the history of Indian cricket would be Gavaskar and Sehwag. But a complete contrast in approach.
[Guest]: Both great in their own ways. But look at And also, you can't deny that Sehwag has left
[Guest]: behind a magnificent legacy. Now, it may never be achievable by somebody else unless you've
[Guest]: got a similar mindset and a hard disk which works like Sehwag's did. You know, how he
[Amit Varma]: played boggles the mind even now.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely outstanding. Let's continue talking about your career at this point. You've become
[Amit Varma]: a cricket journalist. Do you see yourself being at this point someone who will write
[Amit Varma]: about cricket all his life? Because what it seems to me from that vantage point of, say,
[Amit Varma]: the early 80s, you know, before 83 happens, from that vantage point, when you're looking
[Amit Varma]: ahead, you don't know what's happened. So it must seem like more of the same, more of
[Amit Varma]: the same all your life. And eventually, of course, what happened we know is that 83 happened
[Amit Varma]: and then liberalisation happened and then the game exploded and IPL happened. And essentially,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've basically covered cricket through the most exciting decades. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we are both so fortunate to have been doing what we kind of did. But at that time,
[Amit Varma]: what was your conception? Were you thinking that I've started in journalism with cricket
[Amit Varma]: writing, I also want to do other things? Were there other kinds of journalism which inspired
[Guest]: you? You know, tell me a bit.
[Guest]: So look, to be honest, I thought I wouldn't last in journalism. I thought I would actually
[Guest]: kind of get back maybe to law. A, the money wasn't good. I was married. I had become a
[Guest]: father. I was a young father by, you know, by end 82, 83. I went to the World Cup in
[Guest]: 1983. And I, you know, I said this is my last, last assignment. Maybe I'll do something else.
[Guest]: Maybe I'll join up as a junior lawyer somewhere. My father's, you know, goodwill was there.
[Guest]: I could have got into a law firm and work my way up. By that time, he was, you know,
[Guest]: he had passed away in 1973. So I couldn't join him, but people he knew. I went to the
[Guest]: World Cup, I thought, to cover a big event. That was a kind of an ambition, a dream. So
[Guest]: I said, let's do this and see. But I went there and, you know, India won the World Cup.
[Guest]: And it just kind of changed my mind completely. I said, the excitement and the thrill of seeing
[Guest]: India win that World Cup, when I came back, I said, forget about law. This is what I'm
[Guest]: going to stick with. And I stuck with it for 10 years nonstop. And I was on the road, virtually,
[Guest]: you know, every time India went on any tour, I was there. Or tour even domestically, I
[Guest]: was there. And to the extent that I, when I look back, I think sometimes that I didn't
[Guest]: see my son grow up. You know, you're always on the road. And then in 93, I got an offer,
[Guest]: which was very strange. It was kind of sprung on me by the owners of Midday, Tariq Ansari.
[Guest]: He said, I want you to edit the paper. So I said, you know, I remember this very distinctly
[Guest]: because the office was in Tardeo. We walked down towards Bhatia Hospital, there was a
[Guest]: Kamath's restaurant across the road, and over Medu Vada and Chutney, he said, will you take
[Guest]: this, you know, why don't you become the editor? I said, I'm doing sports, I'm quite happy.
[Guest]: He said, no, but, you know, think about it. So I said, okay, give me six months. I had
[Guest]: planned, it was within the organization, it had been worked out that I will go to Wimbledon
[Guest]: in 93. And there was a tour to Sri Lanka coming up. So I wanted to do those two tours. He
[Guest]: said, fine, let's wait. So in the meanwhile, he also sent, you know, I went to New York
[Guest]: and did a stint in New York Post, which was also a tabloid for about two or three weeks.
[Guest]: I was there just to see how newsroom functions and all are happening, which actually quite
[Guest]: excited me. So when I came back, I did the Wimbledon, I did the Sri Lanka tour, and then
[Guest]: I became the editor of Midday. And it was a big shift for me. It took me that much time
[Guest]: to, you know, I had a great life. I was on much envied life, if you can, you know, even
[Guest]: within the newsroom. I mean, whoever may have been the editor, the cricket correspondents
[Guest]: or cricket writers, life was the toast of the newsroom. And I had to give that up. And
[Guest]: then when you're editor, then there are, you know, you become accountable for everybody
[Guest]: else. Here you are accountable to your department. By that time, I was also the sports editor
[Guest]: and the editor of Sportsweek magazine. So to give all that up and take on this assignment
[Guest]: in 93, Sportsweek had shut down. But it was a challenge, which I think finally, it captured
[Guest]: my imagination. And then I said, let's do it. That's where I switched and took up, I
[Guest]: became editor of Midday. But once a year, I would take a tour on my leave would be even
[Guest]: if it was a short tour, it meant just going and doing two matches, I would keep up with
[Guest]: cricket.
[Amit Varma]: One, what did you learn at New York Post? You know, what did they do differently that
[Amit Varma]: impressed you? And that you said that you want to incorporate it as editor? And also,
[Amit Varma]: what specifically about the job of an editor, because a lot of people who will start off
[Amit Varma]: with the kind of work that you enjoy doing, you're traveling everywhere, you're covering
[Amit Varma]: cricket, it's a dream life, will also say they don't want to manage people. And it's
[Amit Varma]: a completely different skill set. Obviously, as a sports editor, and all you had some experience
[Amit Varma]: at that. But one, it's a different skill set managing people. And two, it's a different
[Amit Varma]: skill set editing an actual general newspaper where you have to assign priorities, decide
[Amit Varma]: what gets covered all of that. So did you just dive into it without thinking about it
[Amit Varma]: much? Or did you spend some time thinking about it and craft a kind of editorial philosophy
[Amit Varma]: for yourself that these are the kind of things I will focus on? What was that like?
[Guest]: So you know, there are two questions. And one is that what did I learn in New York Post?
[Guest]: I thought in New York Post, though it's a very short stint, and it was just to help
[Guest]: me come to terms with tabloid journalism. That was the purpose of my going there was
[Guest]: in terms of layout, screaming headlines, which capture your attention. You know, most of
[Guest]: the papers, at least in the afternoon, the midday was an afternoon paper is sold on the
[Guest]: stands. It's not necessarily home delivered, it used to be office delivered, but the stand
[Guest]: sales were the most. So it had to be very appealing for a passerby to say, hey, I want
[Guest]: this copy. And then the the mix of stories, you know, how much crime becomes a big thing
[Guest]: for tabloids. So how do you play up the crime stories? And therefore, what should be the
[Guest]: drill of the reporters and the access into getting information about crime, those stories,
[Guest]: those are things that, you know, I went on beat reporting with the reporters just to
[Guest]: find out how they go about doing it, you know, and I found that they were very aggressive
[Guest]: in New York, though it's a big city, much like Mumbai or bigger than Mumbai in terms
[Guest]: of news coverage. But it was very exciting just being out there with the beat reporter
[Guest]: and the kind they, the way they approached and, you know, went after news. There was
[Guest]: an aggression, which I didn't find existed in Indian newsrooms.
[Guest]: Give me an example.
[Guest]: So if there's a drug bust, you know, in New York City, then they would send two reporters,
[Guest]: one to the place of the crime, one to the, you know, and so swiftly into where the police
[Guest]: station, wherever the case is going to be investigated. And they were far more advanced
[Guest]: in their, you know, how information was transmitted. I mean, telephone access in India, even in
[Guest]: 93, was not so easy. While for the US, for the Americans, it was far easier. But they
[Guest]: would have on one crime story, maybe three, four guys, they would pull out somebody from
[Guest]: here and send them for the, this is a big story. Let's put all our arsenal in this and
[Guest]: play it up because this is going to be a big story, a front page story. While in India,
[Guest]: I think we were still a little structured. These are your crime reporters. These are
[Guest]: your civic reporters. Yes, they were all of that. But if a story broke, then, you know,
[Guest]: you put all your might towards that because ultimately tabloids sold on your front page
[Guest]: story and maybe page three and then the features and then the sports.
[Guest]: I think the single biggest impression on me was a very aggressive pursuit of two or three
[Guest]: stories rather than getting 30 stories. Because even for Midday, very popular for its crossword
[Guest]: and its comics and entertainment section and glamour columns and all that. If you chase
[Guest]: 30 stories, you might end up with not even three or three of any great, you know, worth.
[Guest]: So that was one of the things which I learned. And when I came back, I tried to implement
[Guest]: that in. And I think also my predecessors had left a very good newsroom. You know, there's
[Guest]: a lot of young talent, you know, Nikhil Lakshman, Prem Panikkar, who preceded me, Meenal Bagel.
[Guest]: These all, they all became household names. They were, Nikhil was a very well-known. Sharda
[Guest]: Ogra. Sharda Ogra, Prajwal Hegde. Hemal. We had Hemal. In Midday, actually, we had an
[Guest]: all-women's sports team. You know, legendary. And including the photographer, Savita Kirloskar.
[Guest]: Yeah, who worked with me later at Wisden. Yeah, wonderful photographer.
[Guest]: Right. And she was the one who I, you know, when I became the editor, I sent to Yorkshire
[Guest]: when Sachin went there to cover his stay there because she was a writer as well as a photographer.
[Guest]: The energy, I think what I enjoyed most in Midday, and that was an advantage, that they
[Guest]: were all, it was a very young team, barring some, you know, some of the news editor, some
[Guest]: of those who were got from other newspapers and brought there. But by and large, the army
[Guest]: of people who were there at the desk and the reporters, they were all very young, all looking
[Guest]: to get ahead, enjoying their work, getting stories. Obviously, a lot of them would move
[Guest]: on, you know, like Sharda, you know. But they were really good at their job. So, in that
[Guest]: sense, it became a little easier for me. I didn't have to strain too much. One had to
[Guest]: be a little disciplined because I was so used to being on my own jaunts and to get restricted
[Guest]: to a cabin and pacing the newsroom was a bit of a challenge in the first maybe four, five,
[Guest]: six months. But I started enjoying it. There's a dimension to running a newspaper, which,
[Guest]: you know, when you're in that kind of position of an editor, your locus standeye changes
[Guest]: and everything kind of comes to you and then flows from you in many ways. It can't be so
[Guest]: centralized. There are department heads and you have to work well with them, which is
[Guest]: what I always believe in. I think, you know, delegation of responsibility is very important,
[Guest]: provided you know what you're doing for the next day's edition or the next weeks or how
[Guest]: you're planning and budgeting. So, all that comes into play. And I think it just widened
[Guest]: my horizon, my perspective, not just about journalism, but about life, because you come
[Guest]: to know and come across so many different kinds of people.
[Amit Varma]: In terms of writing, how different was it? Like, for example, one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: I do in one of the webinars I teach is I'll take examples from tabloids, from mainstream
[Amit Varma]: newspapers, from a magazine like the New Yorker, or I'll take a Guardian long read and from
[Amit Varma]: a literary novel. And I'll take examples from each of these to point out how the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: are different and therefore the writing is different. The tabloid example I think I use
[Amit Varma]: is from Daily Mail in England, where, you know, they pack in a lot of info in the headline.
[Amit Varma]: And the core assumption for that is that the reader can stop reading at any point in time.
[Amit Varma]: Extreme short attention span, like I would typically read midday when I'm in a local
[Amit Varma]: train commuting somewhere in the mid 90s and one hand is holding the bar above my head
[Amit Varma]: and the other hand as a midday. And therefore you have a very fast rhythm, short one sentence
[Amit Varma]: parahs, everything is information, you don't have the space to go deep or give context
[Amit Varma]: or whatever. And I'm of course giving sort of an extreme example. And therefore the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: of writing for a tabloid are very different, even from the imperatives of writing for a
[Amit Varma]: broadsheet newspaper, like you cannot be Neville Cardas in an afternoon paper, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit more about this.
[Guest]: So you have to, yeah, so you have to customise, you know, you have to customise your writing
[Guest]: skills for suiting a tabloid. And I think what plays a huge role in tabloid journalism,
[Guest]: this is again a commuter paper, midday, you know, most tabloids end up being even in big
[Guest]: cities like London or New York. These are all commuter papers because they're easy to
[Guest]: read even on a train or in a bus. So sharp headlines which provoke, which excite, which
[Guest]: intrigue, you know, you can have lead-ins and, you know, maybe an intro to it which
[Guest]: is two lines, which more or less tells you a story or it keeps or it tickles your palate
[Guest]: so much that you say, I will read it a little later, if not right now, but you will read
[Guest]: it. And then there is a whole other, what I call, condiments that come in, which are,
[Guest]: you know, midday tab, the crossword that we had was almost like a no-brainer crossword.
[Guest]: But the idea was, was a deliberate attempt, that you make it so easy that everybody enjoys
[Guest]: it. It's not the London Times or the Times of India cryptic crossword, which two out
[Guest]: of hundred may manage and everybody is frustrated and say, I will not attempt it. That's a different
[Guest]: profile of leadership. And if you have a large mass of readers, then you can attempt all
[Guest]: of that. There are comics for relief. There's, it's a, in a way, it's snacky. But I must
[Guest]: say in the context of midday, it became a very powerful influence in city life.
[Guest]: It did.
[Guest]: You know, so it was number two to TUI and we would slap ourselves on the back or thump
[Guest]: ourselves on the back and say, wow, we are competing with TUI. Numbers were, of course,
[Guest]: of huge disparity. But in terms of influence, in terms of people talking about midday, we
[Guest]: had the diary page. The standards set by Bheram Contractor, who was there earlier before he
[Guest]: started Afternoon Dispatch and Courier, was delectable, very high standard of writing
[Guest]: the diary because he had his own way of doing it. So to keep that going, we had to get very
[Guest]: skilful writers. I think Prem Panekar did it for a long while when Nikhil was the editor.
[Guest]: And then we had, you know, several other people who came. So the diary became an important
[Guest]: aspect and facet of this paper, which gave you snippets into life in the city, which
[Guest]: otherwise don't come in news reports, you know, a little bit of spice about society.
[Guest]: The whole packaging of it, how do you capture, how do you make midday a microcosm of Mumbai's
[Guest]: life was really the attempt. And that I found very, very, you know, exciting.
[Amit Varma]: With my rose-tinted glasses on, I would say that that almost felt for me like a golden
[Amit Varma]: age of midday, in the sense that I think what a tabloid should do best is take that sideways
[Amit Varma]: look. Your mainstream newspaper is covering all the main shit that happens. In the tabloid
[Amit Varma]: that, yeah, okay, you got to, you know, attract eyeballs, you do the sensational headlines
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But you also take those little sideways glimpses that a mainstream paper
[Amit Varma]: can't, and you guys did that very well. What do you feel now when you look at, you know,
[Amit Varma]: midday and other similar papers, not to single out one?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think most papers have, I mean, it sounds harsh to say it, but the word which
[Guest]: comes to mind is tepid. So even while midday was a, what we used to call the complete family
[Guest]: newspaper and a city, you know, city-based, comprehensive package, fun, entertainment,
[Guest]: excitement, but there was also sometimes, not sometimes, but the attempt was to find
[Guest]: edge to our reporting also. So there will be a lot of investigative stuff. The kidney
[Guest]: sales racket, you know, which was broken by midday. We had, I think amongst, we were the
[Guest]: first paper, if I remember correctly, following up on the bomb blast case, Bombay bomb blast
[Guest]: case and the trial, the Tata court proceedings which are going on, which some of the mainstream
[Guest]: or the mainstream newspapers were a little hesitant to, and then of course, competition
[Guest]: arrives, then everybody starts covering and then it gets amplified, which is what was
[Guest]: needed. So midday was in fairly, very ballsy for its time, you know. So a little cheeky,
[Guest]: it was provocative, it was, you know, and everybody wanted to be featured in midday.
[Guest]: From Mumbai's movers and shakers, everybody wanted to be seen in midday or featured in
[Guest]: midday in some way. The weekend paper would be Sunday midday where we would actually have
[Guest]: a lot of long reads and columns and, you know, stuff that you can read at leisure, and that
[Guest]: would be delivered in the morning. So I was there as editor for seven and a half years.
[Guest]: And in many ways, those were the best years of my journalism along with whatever I've
[Guest]: done in sport and cricket.
[Amit Varma]: Take me to the next step of your journey. What happens next? Where do you go after that?
[Guest]: So 2000 is when I, 2001 is, you know, 2000 is when I quit. And I actually, I'd come to
[Guest]: know Mark Mascarinis by then, you know, WorldTel was his company and he was managing Sachin.
[Guest]: And he had this great desire to start, to make India actually, he saw it, he was a visionary
[Guest]: in many ways, he was a big talking Yankee, but he was also a visionary. And he saw India
[Guest]: as becoming the hub of international cricket in a really big way at that point in time.
[Guest]: So he wanted to start in, you know, 2000 was the time when everybody was talking dot-com.
[Guest]: So he wanted a dot cricket website, dot-com and a cricket magazine. He got in touch with
[Guest]: me, we talked about it for almost six, eight, nine months before I said yes to him because
[Guest]: leaving midday was not easy. But I just felt that maybe I need a slightly different challenge
[Guest]: and, you know, new medium to explore, which is the dot-com. So I quit in March of 2000
[Guest]: or thereabouts. And we started this TotalCricket.com and Cricket Talk. And just as we started,
[Guest]: the match fixing scam broke. And Mark had his venture capitalist and whoever else who
[Guest]: pulled back from supporting the website, the magazine continued for six, eight months.
[Guest]: By the end of the year, it looked to me that, you know, it's not making headway. And I was
[Guest]: being pursued at that point in time by Times of India, you know, you join us and join us.
[Guest]: So they made it, you know, wear two hats. You become the editor of Bombay Times, which
[Guest]: is not the Bombay Times as it is seen now, as it is now, because at that point in time,
[Guest]: they wanted it to be an extended or more expanded version of Midday, you know, a city glamour
[Guest]: and all that, but more city and stuff, and also be national sports editor. And that attracted
[Guest]: me. I said, you know, wearing two hats is great. So, you know, so I said yes, and I
[Guest]: joined TOI in November 2000. And I was there for about four, five years. And then I left
[Guest]: because by that time, Bombay Times had become a complete entertainment supplement rather
[Guest]: than a city supplement. And I was, you know, then I was doing only sports. And then DNA
[Guest]: was being plotted. And they approached me, DNA, okay, would you like to join? And you
[Guest]: know, you'll be heading, they had planned a collegium system of editors, which was quite
[Guest]: interesting at that point in time. And they wanted me to do the whole city thing plus
[Guest]: sports. And also then they added the Sunday Pit to start with. And I found that was exciting
[Guest]: enough. So I moved to DNA, which lasted another good five years. But, you know, I don't think
[Guest]: the paper went exactly the way it was planned, or where it was headed. And yeah, 2009 end,
[Guest]: I opted out and I had the choice to work with another newspaper again or another or strike
[Guest]: out on my own. And I said, if not now, then never. You know, I was 54. I said, let me
[Guest]: just try and see what what happens from here. Let's see what happens. And yeah, it's been
[Guest]: about 12 years since I've been writing, doing stuff. I've done commentary for Star Sports,
[Guest]: for Sony. I've done a lot of television. I'm doing a lot. I've done a lot of work on the
[Guest]: digital space. And I continue doing a lot of work in text.
[Amit Varma]: Awesome. What a journey. And you know, for my listeners who are into cricket and into
[Amit Varma]: cricket journalism, but may not have heard of cricket talk a quick little bit of context
[Amit Varma]: cricket talk, you know, you edited it, like you said, it came out for a few months. But
[Amit Varma]: one of the impressive things you did there, as we were discussing over lunch a little
[Amit Varma]: while back, is you put together an outstanding team. So you had young writers like Akshay
[Amit Varma]: Sawai, Rahul Bhattacharya, and you got Sambit Bal to do the website for it. Sambit had just
[Amit Varma]: left Gentleman, which was like India's version of Esquire and a bloody good magazine while
[Amit Varma]: Sambit was editing it. But he moved on from there, joined you to sort of run the website.
[Amit Varma]: And then you parted ways, you went to Times, and he went on to take wisdom.com, where one
[Amit Varma]: of the remarkable things I think he did as an editor, which was important for cricket
[Amit Varma]: journalism in India, was just got a lot of young writers and bright, he was a magnet
[Amit Varma]: for good young writers. You know, people like Rahul Bhattacharya, Dilip Premchandran, S.
[Amit Varma]: Rajesh joined around the same time as me, and a whole bunch of others, Siddhartha Vaidyanathan,
[Amit Varma]: Sid V came later. And I think that just kind of had an early butterfly effect in the sense
[Amit Varma]: of what, you know, using the new medium, figuring out what was possible. And many of these writers
[Amit Varma]: went on to, you know, though I didn't stay in cricket writing beyond that decade, but
[Amit Varma]: many of the other guys are just absolutely top class writers today. And later, of course,
[Amit Varma]: Sharda joined him and Jayaditya joined him and it was just a great team.
[Guest]: No, I think Sambit has been outstanding as an editor for Crickinfo. And also, I think
[Guest]: for the fact that he steered Crickinfo to a position of eminence, not just because it's
[Guest]: a repository of all the data that you want in cricket, but also for the quality of its
[Guest]: writing. And as you mentioned that, he was like a magnet attracting young talent. I think
[Guest]: largely because of his temperament, he's got a great temperament. I think he's hugely secure
[Guest]: as an editor. So, he's not worried about, am I writing, is somebody else writing better
[Guest]: than me and therefore what will happen? I think he's interested, I think in that sense
[Guest]: he's a visionary. So, he's promoted a lot of very talented youngsters to become formidable
[Guest]: names. Siddharth Maunga, for instance, who worked briefly with me in DNA and joined and
[Guest]: he's, you know, gone places. So, at a global level, you know, and I think Sambit himself,
[Guest]: he was very passionate. Sambit and I go back to Independent when I was Sports Editor of
[Guest]: Independent briefly.
[Amit Varma]: This is 1989.
[Guest]: 1989, 1990, when he was on the civic beat. So, he was a BMC reporter and he was very
[Guest]: young, much younger than me, 23, 24. And at that point in time, I didn't, I had no clue
[Guest]: at all that he was so passionate about cricket. And then, of course, he joined Gentleman and
[Guest]: edited Gentleman at a very young age. So, I mean, he is inheritor of a legacy in journalism,
[Guest]: you know, his family from Odisha was into media. So, some values he's imbibed very early.
[Guest]: I would imagine, I've never met, apart from his brother, I've met not many other people.
[Guest]: But I think the very strong values of editorial freedom, independence, these are very strong
[Guest]: values in him. And also looking at reporters and writers in a very humane way and creating
[Guest]: opportunities for everybody to grow. That's my surmise, not that we've had great discussions
[Guest]: on this, but seeing the trajectory of his own career, I think he's done an absolutely
[Guest]: fabulous job. And he himself has grown tremendously as a writer, not just an editor, but also
[Guest]: as a writer, you know, and somebody and what I think has perhaps helped him the most is
[Guest]: his immediate understanding that technology is going to drive journalism or writing going
[Guest]: ahead. So, he's been amongst the first I remember, or amongst people I know, who immersed himself
[Guest]: into understanding where technology is going and, you know, use that as expanding the horizons
[Guest]: of influence of Click Info and for his writers and for himself.
[Amit Varma]: And besides being a lovely man, what I realized about what a good editor he was is, in retrospect,
[Amit Varma]: having worked with him for many years, kind of one of the things that I've learned looking
[Amit Varma]: back is that a good editor first and foremost must be an enabler of good people. He had
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of talented young writers with him, but he didn't try to force a particular way
[Amit Varma]: of writing or a style or any of that on them. He allowed them space to make their mistakes
[Amit Varma]: and to grow. Like I remember at the time that I began with him, I was a typical flamboyant
[Unknown]: young writer, I want to show off my skills, the fancy turn of phrase, all of that and
[Amit Varma]: you learn with experience. And rather than whip me into submission, he allowed me to
[Amit Varma]: play some of my shorts to, you know, to smoothen that out. And in that sense, a very nurturing
[Amit Varma]: editor in a way that perhaps kind of goes unseen, but to kind of get back to your sort
[Amit Varma]: of story, the last 12 years you've been on your own. Now, one of the things I realized
[Amit Varma]: after I did my last sort of full time job, which was at Click Info, after that I was
[Amit Varma]: a consulting editor with them for a couple of years, but I was kind of out of there for
[Amit Varma]: by 2009. And after that, I kind of realized that I can never do a job again. Because once
[Amit Varma]: you have the freedom of working for yourself, which is such a great privilege, if you can
[Amit Varma]: manage it, I realized ki nahi hoga aur main office nahi jaasakta, register sign nahi kar
[Amit Varma]: sakta and all of that crap. You know, what are the pros and cons for you? What was sort
[Guest]: of the solo life for you as it were?
[Guest]: So initially, I must confess that it was a little difficult, you know, I like while I
[Guest]: made that choice consciously, I felt the pangs, you know, I was missing newsroom because I
[Guest]: just spent a long time in newsrooms, about 30 years. So it became a little initially
[Guest]: a little difficult, then I found that I had more elbow room, I had more, you know, I was
[Guest]: more convenienced by my time being my own, of course, you have to manage the time well,
[Guest]: and you have to get enough assignments that can sometimes become a bit of a problem. And
[Guest]: then after you've got the assignments, you have to ensure that the money keeps coming
[Guest]: in otherwise that becomes a bigger problem. So the flow of income can become a little,
[Guest]: the pattern can be irregular, but they're not, there will be defaulters. But as yet,
[Guest]: I would say that by and large, I haven't been kind of shafted, you know, I haven't been,
[Guest]: you know, troubled too much. So in that sense, if your livelihood is looked after, your professional
[Guest]: assignments give you the reach and the exposure that you've enjoyed, ultimately, that's what,
[Guest]: you know, there's a certain vanity, if you might call it, that I'm reaching out and so
[Guest]: many people are reading it, and sometimes you get the feedback, if that is met, then
[Guest]: you don't, you start missing the newsroom less and less, except for the old style companionship
[Guest]: of being in a new, you know, in times of India, the newsroom would be 150-200 people, the
[Guest]: floor. Even in DNA, when we started 200 people, so you don't have that many people around
[Guest]: you now, you know, you're probably alone. Or if you're in a commentary stand, maybe
[Guest]: you've got 7, 8, 10 people. So there is a sense of, you know, that is a, in a way, it
[Guest]: gets a little lonely, but you have to come to terms with it, and then you start enjoying
[Guest]: it. You find that you're able to spend a little more time outside, because if you're in an
[Guest]: office, then you're spending, yes, you got 200 people, but you get sucked into all kinds
[Guest]: of things, which may actually be adding not much value to your life, apart from, you know,
[Guest]: just being together. So that I think has been something and also see, I'm not 25-26, where
[Guest]: you need that kind of, you know, very busy life involved with everybody else. At this
[Guest]: stage of my life, I'm quite happy being on my own and doing the stuff that I want to
[Guest]: do. And if I keep getting decent assignments, I'm, what more can one ask for?
[Amit Varma]: You know, I had Veer Sanghvi on my show a few weeks ago. And one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: he pointed out was that once you become an editor, it's very seductive, you want to be
[Amit Varma]: an editor forever, because of everything that kind of goes with it. And I would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that all the offers that came to you would be at approximately that level, that will,
[Amit Varma]: will you be an editor? And it, you know, did it get tempting at some times? Were there
[Amit Varma]: times where you just sat back and said, I'm doing this trivial thing myself, some secretary
[Amit Varma]: would have done it for me?
[Guest]: Absolutely. That is the biggest, see, there are two things, you know, Veer is right. And
[Guest]: I'll tell you what the pangs are really, without kind of mincing words, there's a sense of
[Guest]: absence of power. So, when you're an editor, whatever the scale of the organization, you
[Guest]: know, it's like you're the centrifugal force, everything flows in and out from the editor's
[Guest]: cabin, the power at least of how the newsroom runs, there'll be various people working towards
[Guest]: it. But so that absence of power can, can take, you know, it can, you can feel it. You
[Guest]: can, it's a captain of a team, cricket team, you remove that person from the captaincy,
[Guest]: it takes a long while for that player to get readjusted to being just an ordinary member.
[Guest]: So that absence you feel and yeah, but, but beyond, so the other paraphernalia that comes
[Guest]: along with it, it's not just the power, but it's also the conveniences. You have a Secchi,
[Guest]: you will do all kinds of things for you. Now, you know, if I have to book an air ticket,
[Guest]: I have to do it myself. You know, if I have to get five phone calls back to back, I have
[Guest]: to keep doing it myself with somebody I could have just told my secretary, you know, these
[Guest]: are, this is the time, just make sure you give me the calls. So all those conveniences
[Guest]: also become a bit of a problem when they are gone. But hey, this is, you know, it's now
[Guest]: new age and you have to adjust. And now, in fact, post-pandemic, I think more and more
[Guest]: people are beginning to realize that you have to, you know, people have become actually
[Guest]: more independent because they're sitting and working from home. And therefore, they have
[Guest]: to extend that sense now rather than clamoring or craving for, I mean, ultimately all sense
[Guest]: of power at the end of it is delusionary. It is there, well, it is there, once it goes
[Guest]: and we don't even know how much power, what people said behind your back and whether everybody
[Guest]: did what you thought is also a sense of, it's a delusion, you know, it could be. So, I think
[Guest]: you have to reconcile. Reconciliation in life is one of the great things, you know, you
[Guest]: have to reconcile to so many things. So, you have to reconcile to also the fact that there
[Guest]: is a time where, you know, you climb up and you reach a certain level and there will be
[Guest]: a time when you don't have that. And it doesn't mean that what you've lost is something that
[Guest]: will debilitate you to an extent where you lose your identity completely.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of other thoughts strike me. One is that at the level of, you know, being an
[Amit Varma]: editor, you've got managerial responsibility, you are sort of multitasking, you're juggling
[Amit Varma]: various balls. And, you know, Cal Newport wrote this book called Deep Work where he
[Amit Varma]: talks about deep work and shallow work. And deep work is typically when you really need
[Amit Varma]: to get into the zone and you need to write. And every time you're distracted, it takes
[Amit Varma]: you 15 minutes or 20 minutes to get back into a state of deep work. So, if we open ourselves
[Amit Varma]: up to distractions, like from our smartphone or whatever, we can perennially be in a state
[Amit Varma]: of shallow work and never really get deep. Now, his point is that for a manager, that
[Amit Varma]: is okay, because you are doing shallow work anyway, you're coordinating things, you're
[Amit Varma]: looking at timelines, you're talking to one department head, what are the stories for
[Amit Varma]: today, what do we run with, blah, blah, blah, that's perfectly fine. But when you're working
[Amit Varma]: for yourself, ideally, the balance shifts a little bit, you want to do more writing,
[Amit Varma]: you want to do more reading, you want to focus more on that. So, one, how was that shift
[Amit Varma]: for you? And two, how would you then give your day structure? Like what I have found
[Amit Varma]: hardest working for myself is just meeting internal deadlines. Like if somebody else
[Amit Varma]: gives me a deadline, I can meet it, I will panic. You know, as Douglas Adams once said
[Amit Varma]: deadlines, I love deadlines, especially the sound they make as I go whooshing by. So,
[Amit Varma]: so I can panic, but the deadline helps. But when I have to be internally driven, I find
[Amit Varma]: it really hard to structure my day to get work done. How are those for you? How did
[Guest]: you manage?
[Guest]: So I have the same problem. I mean, the internal, you know, deadline, kind of pattern, how do
[Guest]: you put it in place is really the challenge. And then I think this has also to do with
[Guest]: personality types. There are some people who will, I've got a deadline to meet, let me
[Guest]: just get it out of the way. And it's out of the way, you know, while I'll mull over things
[Guest]: and I'll be, I mean, at the end of the day, one is conscious of deadlines. And in newspapers,
[Guest]: you'll find that most, and you've been a writer all your life also. So you, the deadline
[Guest]: is when it's almost, you know, on the precipice. Now I have to deliver. So you might mull over
[Guest]: as much as you want. But if you're a professional journalist, there's a deadline you have to
[Guest]: meet and give it, you know, so I think that you internalize it. And you, if it is somebody
[Guest]: who's given you a four hour deadline saying, I'm, I want this piece, because I have to
[Guest]: put it out by two o'clock in the afternoon, you have to finish it by 12. And you're told
[Guest]: at eight in the morning, you will strive and put it together and do it. But if somebody
[Guest]: says, I want 2000 words, and, you know, give it to me in three days, I doubt that somebody
[Guest]: will do it on, I can't do it on the first day. Unlikely on the second day also, I may
[Guest]: make a few notes and keep it, or I might mull over it in the mind. And inevitably, it'll
[Guest]: be done on the third day. So managing those internal deadlines is an issue, especially
[Guest]: when you are also doing sundry other things, but because you're alone. So, in my case,
[Guest]: and I'm sure it's true of many people who are writers now still, is that you're juggling
[Guest]: with two or three assignments. And therefore, you're working out in your mind all the time,
[Guest]: which is priority, deadline, which is I can hedge a little bit, and how do I meet all
[Guest]: three. And that, you know, that is something that you have to crack, you know. So, and
[Guest]: even amongst editors, so I think what you're talking about the editors, those category
[Guest]: of, that category of editors are those who are writers, who've been managers also, but
[Guest]: who are also writers. There are also lots of production editors today in newspapers,
[Guest]: you know, who don't write. Their job still remains managerial, suppose they might become
[Guest]: a consulting editor somewhere, but it's not about writing. So, I think it's a different
[Guest]: yardstick which would apply for them rather than for people like us, who are still writers.
[Amit Varma]: Fair point. Now, I think we come to the part of the show where we should talk about the
[Amit Varma]: journey of Indian cricket, which is what your book is about, much of which you have witnessed
[Amit Varma]: in your storied career. So, let's go back to your 1983 experience, because that is a
[Amit Varma]: truly seminal moment. That's when the world begins to change forever, basically, not to
[Amit Varma]: be too hyperbolic about it. So, tell me a bit about that, because what I find interesting
[Amit Varma]: there is that there is this world event, and there are six Indian journalists there. And
[Amit Varma]: you are one of those six Indian journalists. And because you are on a budget, you are also,
[Amit Varma]: you know, taking great care. So, you missed the first India-West Indies match because
[Guest]: you'd have to travel for it. I missed the first for two reasons. One is that I was,
[Guest]: you know, short on money. I mean, I didn't have money to splurge or even spend, not extravagantly,
[Guest]: but more than is necessary. But I also missed it because I thought India is going to get
[Guest]: licked by West Indies in the first match. So, I have to go to Old Trafford, train fair,
[Guest]: night, I have to stay there for the match. And, you know, hotel, I was in YMCA in London.
[Guest]: And I said, let me go to the Oval where England and New Zealand were playing. And this looks
[Guest]: like an interesting match. And, you know, because New Zealand had two earlier World
[Guest]: Cups had finished in the semi-finals. And they had a young player called Martin Crowe,
[Guest]: who I had come, you know, kind of come to like just reading about his exploits as a
[Guest]: junior when he had started out playing in English county. So, I said, let me go and
[Guest]: watch Martin Crowe and England versus New Zealand rather than go to, you know, predictable
[Guest]: result. So, there I went. But while this match was on, the Oval match, New Zealand-England,
[Guest]: we got information coming in, radio and other that India was really putting up a stiff fight
[Guest]: against West Indies. That match spilled over into the next day because of rain. And India
[Guest]: won the next morning. But of course, by then, it was too late to go to Old Trafford.
[Guest]: But the only thing which I realized as a professional thing, not because of the World Cup, is that,
[Guest]: is, you know, you can't fudge on your professional assignment. You're there to do a certain job.
[Guest]: It's like taking your eyes off the ball. You'll find your thumbs going for a walk. So, I should
[Guest]: have been, that was my biggest, I should have been with India instead of being self-indulgent
[Guest]: and going to watch New Zealand versus England. But that was the start of a terrific campaign.
[Guest]: So, I missed the first match. And then I didn't miss a ball of every match that India played
[Amit Varma]: after that. So, after that, you saw a match which I can only envy that you actually watched it,
[Amit Varma]: which is, of course, that famous Stranbridge Wells match where BBC went on strike for one day.
[Amit Varma]: And that was a day that one of the greatest innings of all time was played when Kapil
[Amit Varma]: Dev made 175. Tell me a bit about what that whole experience was like going to the game,
[Guest]: watching that innings. So, the first thing about that I must tell you is that I reached a little
[Guest]: late. You know, again, trying to save money. So, I was staying in a place in Surbiton in Surrey
[Guest]: with a friend of somebody who I knew from Bombay. He was an engineer and, you know, where I could
[Guest]: save on room rent. And then I took an off-peak ticket to Stranbridge Wells because that would
[Guest]: be half the fare. So, I reached maybe about 20 minutes, 25 minutes after start of play,
[Guest]: running up to the ground. As I entered the ground, the Indian dressing room was right on the right
[Guest]: and it had a little porch. And I saw Gundappa Vishwanath standing there. He was not in the team,
[Guest]: obviously, but he was there. And I said hi to him and I sidled up. I mean, in those days,
[Guest]: nobody stopped you. So, I sidled up to him and I said, how's it going? So, he says,
[Guest]: no, no, nothing to worry about. So, I said, what is he talking about nothing to worry about?
[Guest]: And then I went to the scoreboard and it was like four wickets had gone, you know,
[Guest]: 11 or 12 or 4. I said, what the hell is happening? You know, then I stood there with him for the
[Guest]: next maybe 7, 8 overs. It became 17 for 5. Kapil Dev was already in the middle. India's top order
[Guest]: had been knocked off. It was a devilish pitch, you know, the ball seeming around a lot.
[Guest]: And I stood there till about, for about half an hour, till I found that things were settling a
[Guest]: bit. And Kapil started playing his strokes. And then I went to the, what was the, the press box
[Guest]: was the Shamiana. Well, and the crowd, you know, it was a packed ground, maybe 5, 6,000 people,
[Guest]: most of them old age pensioners, you know, small county and picnic, you know, like a picnic for
[Guest]: them. And, you know, just it became so dramatic once he started going that he was peppering the
[Guest]: ground with boundaries and sixes. And, you know, suddenly he was 175 not out. India had made 262,
[Guest]: something that and went on to win the match. And it became a, I mean, the feeling that something
[Guest]: extraordinary has happened was immediately felt. Now, obviously, one was winning the match from a
[Guest]: near impossible situation. But suddenly one felt, or at least this is the impression I still carry
[Guest]: in my mind is, you know, some transformation has taken place. This is not the same team.
[Guest]: The team had been a little up and down till then. And we're on the verge of being, you know,
[Guest]: Gavaskar had missed out on a couple of matches. There was whether he's dropped. And the stories
[Guest]: we were chasing is, has Gavaskar been dropped? You know, he didn't play a couple of matches.
[Guest]: Then he came back. So, you know, there was always this thing, Gavaskar versus Kapil Dev,
[Guest]: kya ho raha hai, pata nahi hai. Nobody thought India was in this World Cup to win it.
[Guest]: But after that Tonbridge Wells match, things transformed. And six of us also,
[Guest]: the journalists who were there, we got a little more excited about founding,
[Guest]: finding out what else, you know, what next. And then we went to Chelmsford, beat Australia.
[Guest]: Then Old Trafford, where we beat England. That to me was a terrific match. It was a fantastic
[Guest]: match to watch and experience because England were favourites to be in the final along with
[Guest]: West Indies. And, you know, all kinds of desis were there based in England. There's a lot of,
[Guest]: not just banter, but also a lot of, you know, tutu-meh-meh going on between the people.
[Guest]: Kapil Dev eats botham for breakfast, was the placard, very famous placard. Kapil Dev
[Guest]: eats botham for breakfast. And then India beat England in that match. And then was the final.
[Guest]: And again, you know, as the story of my World Cup, I woke up a little late in Surbiton,
[Guest]: which was like an hour or so away. And I said, shit, you know, it's the final of the match.
[Guest]: And I counted my money. I said, I'm taking a cab and going. And that was the big mistake I made.
[Guest]: Because you try and come by a cab in London, it takes far longer than tube and, you know,
[Guest]: connections and whatever. And apart from costing you an arm and a leg. So, when I landed up,
[Guest]: running past Grace Gates, and there's a roar. And a very West Indian roar. You could make out
[Guest]: it's a West Indian roar. So, I, you know, the press box was, I think, three stories up. And
[Guest]: there's an elevator, which I couldn't wait for. I just asked the guy, what happened?
[Guest]: Gavaskar is out, you know. So, I'm running up. And Richie Benoit is coming down. I think he was
[Guest]: moving between some assignment radio to television or whatever. I had met him earlier in one of the
[Guest]: grounds. And he was, of course, Richie Benoit. And he said, I'm still offering you odds, you know,
[Guest]: 60 to 1. 60 to 1 on India winning. 66 to 1. At the start of the tournament, he said,
[Guest]: I'm still offering you that. Please tell me you put some money on it.
[Guest]: I didn't put any money. I said, 10 pounds will go.
[Guest]: Why lose 10 pounds? I've already paid 40 some quid for taxi. And I'm bust. So, I went on,
[Guest]: I went up and sat in the press box. And, of course, we all know what happened in that match.
[Guest]: The press box in those days was at long leg, at one side, not behind the bowler's arm. So,
[Guest]: we had a complete view of the ground, but not the vertical view, so to speak.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But the match as it transpired, you know, it just, I don't think that till the last wicket fell,
[Guest]: the West Indian supporters were convinced that they were going to lose. You can see that now
[Guest]: when you look at the footage, there's Michael Hogan, there's Michael Hogan, there's Richie
[Guest]: when you look at the footage, there's Michael Holding who gets out and there's some supporters
[Guest]: who run to the ground. One of them is like almost cajoling him, you come back, how could he lose
[Guest]: this match, you know, lose to India. And then there was a Shamiana for Prudential where I went
[Guest]: and couple of days, of course, I think the first time I saw a couple of little tipsy, he must have
[Guest]: had a champagne, maybe a couple of glasses of champagne before I reached there. But very few
[Guest]: West Indian players, they were pissed off as hell. I saw Clive Lloyd and Desmond Haynes,
[Guest]: two guys I can remember, maybe Michael Holding, three of them, but not the others,
[Guest]: certainly not Viv Richards, I didn't see him because his wicket was the turning point.
[Guest]: But it was the greatest experience of my life as a sports writer and a cricket writer,
[Guest]: seeing India win the World Cup at that point in time, I was 27. And I said,
[Guest]: boss, yeah, you know, this high, I will never get if I do law or whatever else,
[Guest]: you know, so forget about law. Let's, you know, let's get into journalism. So, I came back and
[Guest]: I met my boss, who was Sharath Kotnes, who was the editor of Sportsweek magazine. And I told him,
[Guest]: I'm going to quit after this World Cup. So, he said, and he was, you know,
[Guest]: abhi kya hai, what is your thought now? I said, I'm going to work as a journalist,
[Guest]: but I need more money. You know, I can't survive on the money you're paying me,
[Guest]: 800 bucks or whatever it was then, 1983. So, he gave me a raise immediately,
[Guest]: which kind of convinced me that I made the right, my right decision because, you know,
[Guest]: 1200, 1300 bucks in those days meant a lot. I was not even sure if I would make that much in
[Guest]: law practice, maybe subsequently. But at that point in time, at least it paid for my bike's
[Guest]: petrol and looked after me and my wife and my very young son reasonably well. So, I said fine.
[Amit Varma]: It kind of strikes me like I keep talking in different contexts about the importance of
[Amit Varma]: probabilistic thinking. And I feel that enough people don't do it when they look at cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, we now look back at 83. And with the benefit of hindsight, everything that
[Amit Varma]: has already happened seemed inevitable. So, now it seems like 1983 was destiny.
[Amit Varma]: India was destined to win it. The way I look at it is different. The way I look at it is that
[Amit Varma]: Richie Benoist's odds to you of 60 to 1 might even have been the correct ones, who knows.
[Unknown]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: But it turned out to be the 1 in 61 times that India actually wins. So, extremely sort of lucky
[Amit Varma]: in that sense. Like once when I was writing a column on poker for Economic Times, one of my
[Amit Varma]: pieces had the headline, unlikely is inevitable. You know, the law of truly large numbers says that
[Amit Varma]: if you have enough number of iterations, unlikely things are likely to happen. It's just the way it
[Amit Varma]: is. And the way I kind of ask people to visualize probability is that you flip a coin and imagine
[Amit Varma]: that immediately the world splits into two parallel universes. And then one of them is heads
[Amit Varma]: and the other one is tails. And so on infinitely down the line. And in that one parallel universe,
[Amit Varma]: we win. But in many more parallel universes, honestly, West Indies wins.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: In some England wins. I don't think Zimbabwe wins in any, but otherwise you have it kind of spread
[Amit Varma]: out on who wins. Now, that leads me to thinking is that that moment is incredibly seminal because
[Amit Varma]: of what follows. Like number one, Dalmia, Bindra and NKP Salve are pissed off that they didn't get
[Amit Varma]: enough tickets. They were treated badly. And they're like, what the hell, we won the World
[Amit Varma]: Cup. Agla wala India mein hoga. And therefore that shifts. And the next World Cup is in India.
[Amit Varma]: And then liberalization happens. And commerce dictates the rest of what happens. And eventually
[Amit Varma]: over a period of time, India becomes the center of world cricket as it is today. And all of it
[Amit Varma]: started with that one little thing. And had we not won that, had we not been in that parallel
[Amit Varma]: universe where India actually wins a damn thing, you know, all of this may not have happened.
[Guest]: You've kind of put it very briefly, but I can tell you, I can expand it a little.
[Guest]: Please, please.
[Guest]: I mean, India wouldn't have been the power it is in cricket today, but for the 83 victory.
[Guest]: And let me explain why. One is obviously the impact it had on the Indian psyche,
[Guest]: you know, and suddenly you felt like champions. And that's a major boost
[Guest]: in the feel good factor for the country. You know, I mean, sport is soft power, as we know,
[Guest]: and that really and cricket is such a passion. So, it happened. But also what happened was
[Guest]: Dalmia and Salve and Bindra being denied those extra passes and, you know, they
[Guest]: just kind of bruised their ego so badly. So, what happened subsequently? To shift the World Cup
[Guest]: from England to the subcontinent was not easy. They had to tie up with Pakistan Cricket Board.
[Guest]: So, NKP Salve and Air Marshal Retired Noor Khan, who was the PCB Chief or BPCC, as it was called
[Guest]: then, Board of BCCP, you know, they connived, they worked out friendship with each other, because
[Guest]: it wasn't possible to hold all, there was not enough stadia in India for a World Cup.
[Guest]: These were the objections raised by the lobby of England, Australia, New Zealand,
[Guest]: even the West Indies, which used to traditionally align with that block. So, India, Pakistan,
[Guest]: Sri Lanka and the associate countries, they had to win over. And without Pakistan's help,
[Guest]: it wouldn't have been possible. So, the governments had to be involved. So, Rajiv Gandhi and Zia-ul-Haq
[Guest]: had to be involved. And they had to restrict the number of overs from 60 to 50, because of,
[Guest]: you know, the twilight situation in India. And that the objection was from, you know, the
[Guest]: TCCB and MCC and whoever else, the World Cup, that World Cup organizers, Prudential, that how
[Guest]: can you have a 60-over tournament reduced to 50 overs? So, the one counter to that was double
[Guest]: everything, the money, which Dalmia was very good at. When nothing works, money works. So,
[Guest]: everybody's monies were doubled. Whatever happened in 83, everything, the finances were doubled.
[Guest]: So, Pakistan and India collaborating to get the World Cup to the subcontinent,
[Guest]: it is held jointly between India and Pakistan. Subsequently, also it happened in 96. But the
[Guest]: two countries were not, you know, it had become a little inimical to each other. So, but
[Guest]: overs reduced, money doubled, and the World Cup comes to the subcontinent. In my opinion,
[Guest]: amongst the greatest World Cups that have been played. India didn't win, Pakistan didn't win.
[Guest]: They were the two favorites. It didn't happen. Australia beat England in the final at Eden
[Guest]: Gardens. 90,000 people plus turned up, which made India the Mecca of cricket, in my opinion. That is
[Guest]: a turning point. And of course, after the IPL started and everything else, it's also become the El Dorado.
[Amit Varma]: And it's worth stating again that in these tribal times, 90,000 people turned up to watch a match
[Guest]: that did not involve their country. It didn't involve their country. It was amazing. It was
[Guest]: absolutely, I mean, it was astounding. And that's what, I mean, Calcutta got its, you know, charm
[Guest]: as a cricketing center from there. And, you know, the Calcutta fandom, as we go, you know, whatever
[Guest]: it is, the mindset of the Calcuttans now, why they are so passionate and crazy about sports,
[Guest]: that's a story in itself. And then, of course, India is
[Amit Varma]: Some could argue too passionate given 96.
[Guest]: Too passionate. But by 87, and then, of course, we are approaching liberalization and
[Guest]: cable TV penetration starts happening. You know, that's where the influence,
[Guest]: subsequently, of Marc Mascareas comes in. Broadcast rights start getting valued far more.
[Guest]: Liberalization, opening up of the airwaves, broadcast, and therefore, the valuation going up
[Guest]: of cricket rights all happened within that 4, 5, 6 years, starting from 87. If the 87 World Cup had
[Guest]: bombed, then things could have been different. But 87 World Cup only happened
[Guest]: Because 83.
[Guest]: Because 83 happened. So, you know, if you trace back the monumental growth of cricket in India,
[Guest]: not just in terms of passion and coverage and all, but also in finances, it all goes back to 83.
[Amit Varma]: I sort of remember this vague story about how in the early 90s,
[Amit Varma]: when BCCI wanted Doordarshan to broadcast their matches, Doordarshan said,
[Amit Varma]: how much money will you give us to broadcast the matches?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just imagine what a shift in mindset then subsequently kind of happened.
[Guest]: Absolutely. I mean, you had to pay the broadcaster.
[Guest]: The cricket board had to pay the broadcaster rather than the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: Insane. Absolutely insane. And you mentioned Indira Gandhi. And I just remembered another
[Amit Varma]: of these memories, which are like these childhood memories. And again, I was around 10 at the time,
[Amit Varma]: that India was playing a one-day match. And my favorite batsman at the time, Dilip Engsarkar,
[Amit Varma]: was, I think, approaching his 100. And he had this long, frustrating relationship with an ODI 100
[Amit Varma]: till he finally got one and then he got more. But this was, I think, before he had his first ODI 100.
[Amit Varma]: And he was, I think, approaching 90s. And Sandeep Patil was playing a blazing innings.
[Guest]: Yes, I was there. I was there at that match.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I actually thought that the way Patil is growing,
[Amit Varma]: maybe he can also get a 100 because he was just blazing away.
[Amit Varma]: And then came the news that Mrs. Gandhi had died and the match was called off.
[Guest]: Yes, we were in Pakistan, Sialkot. This is a match at Sialkot.
[Guest]: And the test series had been very dreary. There was a lot of excitement coming up for this one-day
[Guest]: series and especially because India was, you know, World Cup winners. So, and they started
[Guest]: off very well. But this first match, the assassination news came in. And that night
[Guest]: itself, Raj Singh Dungarpur was the manager. So, it was like pack-up time. And in Sialkot,
[Guest]: we didn't even have hotels. We were staying in a guest room. I think the players also were staying
[Guest]: in some, we were in a guest house and they were in some other, maybe a far more elaborate guest house.
[Guest]: But it was back to India within 24 hours. From Sialkot to Karachi and then to Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: So, I want to ask you about another shift that then happens. Like commercially,
[Amit Varma]: everything changes. The center of the game begins to shift. But another interesting shift that
[Amit Varma]: happens and that mirrors a change that happens in the country through the 90s is that the demographic
[Amit Varma]: composition of the team changes in a sense. Like what we've had through the 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s
[Amit Varma]: is that you have these power centers. You have the Bombay School of Cricket and you have Delhi
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, stray players from here and there. But it's not incredibly diverse. It's just sort
[Amit Varma]: of these kind of pockets of influence. And then with liberalization, all of that changes in a very
[Amit Varma]: drastic way. And the change is slow. You could say that the change truly manifests itself only today
[Amit Varma]: or in recent years. Like I remember Harsha Bhogle did an episode with me where we sort of discussed
[Amit Varma]: and I wonder what your thoughts are on it, on how so many young people who came up in Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you'd make your debut at 18 and you'd be burnt out and finished by 20. And part of the
[Amit Varma]: reason some could speculate is that in those days, in the 80s and 90s, the middle class in Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: was really small. Either you were from the elites, but if you were a talented kid breaking down from
[Amit Varma]: below, you weren't able to cope with the sudden fame and success and you didn't have that support
[Amit Varma]: system. Whereas as Harsha said that through the, you know, 90s and aughties, you look at that whole
[Amit Varma]: generation of Tendulkar, Dravid, Ganguly, Kumble, so on. I think the phrase Harsha used was middle
[Amit Varma]: class values. And that in a sense also has shifted not in a bad way, but it has shifted in a good way
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that people from small towns dominate the game today. You have inspirational success
[Amit Varma]: stories like Mohammed Siraj and Shami and Tina Trajan, who are from really humble backgrounds
[Amit Varma]: who are coming up. Tell me a little bit about how this change happened. Was there resistance to it?
[Amit Varma]: Did the system kind of resist it at a certain point in time? And how did the ecosystem change
[Guest]: and make it sort of possible for all of this to happen? So, I think there's been a fairly dramatic
[Guest]: shift. I mean, there were the traditional centers, five, six of them, Mumbai or Bombay, Madras,
[Guest]: Bangalore, Calcutta, Delhi. Kanpur was a test center, though not such a great cricket center,
[Guest]: but it was a test center and so on. So, I think that that started showing a shift from the 80s
[Guest]: and Kapil Dev was one of the guys, you know, he became an iconic figure and therefore very
[Guest]: influential, especially in the north, which was outside of Delhi, not so engaged in cricket.
[Guest]: When I say north, it could also mean UP and Haryana and Punjab. And the gospel of cricket
[Guest]: started spreading. And one of the things that while BCCI is much maligned for many things,
[Guest]: for acts of omission and commission, and rightly so, but one of the things which they did,
[Guest]: which other sports in India failed to do is spread the gospel of cricket across the length
[Guest]: and breadth of the country and create, give enough infra, not the topmost, which has now happened.
[Guest]: And, you know, we've got actually a surfeit of stadiums now, we don't need so many,
[Guest]: but it's there. But decent enough facilities for smaller towns and more fossil areas to,
[Guest]: you know, come and play there. So, the pipeline from very remote areas was established by the
[Guest]: BCCI. And then the, you know, television spread the coverage around every home, people,
[Guest]: community television boxes, people watching matches and, you know, saying, hey, I can do this.
[Guest]: The monetary rewards of cricket started rising and therefore it became an option, a very strong
[Guest]: option for livelihood if you are good enough. Because the whole thing exploded with the IPL
[Guest]: further, you know, there's been geometric progression since then, and now everybody
[Guest]: wants to get into the IPL somehow or the other. The comparison with Pakistan is there, I think
[Guest]: Harcha is right, but it stops at a certain stage because I think Pakistan's biggest problem has
[Guest]: been the lack of a half-decent administration that can look after domestic cricket and therefore
[Guest]: also cricketers. So, while they were, they've also produced fantastic talent, raw talent,
[Guest]: they've not been able to nurture them for any great length of time or enough of them, you know.
[Guest]: So, they produced great players in spite or despite the system not being so great. While India
[Guest]: have been able to harness, especially in the last 30 years and produce and look after its
[Guest]: cricketers much better, you know. And look at, there's been some thought also in this.
[Guest]: Look at the preponderance of fast bowlers today. It was unthinkable. I mean,
[Guest]: one of the biggest laments of Indian cricket has been that we don't have fast bowlers,
[Guest]: except one couple, what will we do? We can't win overseas, we'll struggle.
[Guest]: Today, you're spoiled for choice. You know, you've got so many fast bowlers. In fact,
[Guest]: the problem today is batsmen are not making enough runs for fast bowlers to win your matches
[Guest]: overseas. And that has happened because the pitches have been made better for, you know,
[Guest]: getting the fast bowlers to come and make their skills worthwhile. Not just spinning tracks,
[Guest]: underprepared pitches, where you win a match in two and a half days and why should any fast
[Guest]: bowler make the effort? But now, if there are pitches being prepared and there is reward
[Guest]: for fast bowlers to put in that hard work and get into an IPL team, and each IPL team now has
[Guest]: 16-17 Indian players. Next year, after the auction, there's going to be 10 teams,
[Guest]: that many more players needed. And my surmise now is that for each place that an Indian player
[Guest]: gets into in any of the IPL teams, there are five other competitors he has left behind.
[Guest]: So, there are so many more who are part of the, you know, of the waiting to get a look-in.
[Guest]: And then, there's a cascading effect, you know. So, I think that Indian cricket has become richer
[Guest]: in the financial sense, of course, but also richer in its skills and in the opportunities
[Guest]: it gives to the practitioners today, far better than ever before. And I think that's what is
[Guest]: helping Indian cricket. I mean, one of the unfortunate things which has happened is,
[Guest]: unfortunately, in the sense that we went, we couldn't win the World Test Championship,
[Guest]: which, you know, one thought that they would, given all the skills, the players they had at
[Guest]: their disposal. Of course, give credit to New Zealand for winning that. But that hurt, you know,
[Guest]: in terms of because winning that, you've been number one team for three and a half years,
[Guest]: Test team. But in the final, you lose out.
[Amit Varma]: I think that was finally determined by really one game.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. No, I'm just saying. So, it's a sense of loss in terms of having, you know,
[Guest]: having a cup in your Again, if you look at the number of matches that India has won,
[Guest]: it's far greater than all the other teams.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you mentioned kind of fast bowlers and I'm reminded of an interesting incident that
[Amit Varma]: happened where the night before a Test match began, you know, there were two debutant fast
[Amit Varma]: bowlers in that Test and they were both Muslims. And I was chatting at a party along with a couple
[Amit Varma]: of other journalists with the then chairman of selectors. I won't name him now. Great cricketer
[Amit Varma]: in his own right. Before, he's an old man now. I don't want to get him into controversy.
[Amit Varma]: But he was kind of tipsy. And he said that, you know, why I picked these two kids?
[Amit Varma]: And we said, sir, why? And he said, you know, because if you think about fast bowling,
[Amit Varma]: they eat meat. Meat and two Muslims. He said, you look at the Pathans,
[Amit Varma]: why does Pakistan have so many good fast bowlers? Yeah, so that whole martial theory, you know,
[Amit Varma]: martial as in M-A-R-T-I-A-L, that whole martial race theory, which actually for a long time
[Amit Varma]: dictated the composition of the Pakistan Army. I don't know if it still does.
[Amit Varma]: But the Indian Army stopped the practice of, you know, building units according to
[Amit Varma]: which race you're from. And that that old fallacious notion that certain people can
[Amit Varma]: fight, other people can't fight, you know, and that's obviously complete bunkum.
[Amit Varma]: That brings the importance of the IPL here because it was a conventional notion that
[Amit Varma]: Indians can't do fast bowling, you know. And yet here we are today where some of the best
[Amit Varma]: fast bowlers in the world are very much from India. And I think one of my pieces in your book
[Amit Varma]: also is about this. And I remember even at the time before the IPL started, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I wrote a piece about how it would sort of revolutionize Indian cricket because there
[Amit Varma]: were so many naysayers that commercialization and tamasha and all of that. And it has exceeded
[Amit Varma]: even my expectations in this sense that one before that cricket was a monopsony. You had
[Amit Varma]: one buyer for your services that was a BCCI. Here, even if it's within an artificial environment,
[Amit Varma]: you've broken the monopsony. You have a, you know, a number of different buyers who are
[Amit Varma]: competing for the best talent, who are incentivized to invest in scouting and training and all of
[Amit Varma]: those things. And the incentives for young cricketers no longer are that let me go abroad
[Amit Varma]: to college because who knows whether I'll be the next Sachin Tendulkar. Here, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so many people succeed so many different role models. And it's completely transformed the
[Amit Varma]: game even in terms of skills. Like earlier, you mentioned that, you know, Virat Kohli's fitness,
[Amit Varma]: and I admire that greatly. Like if there is one thing that, you know, that where Virat Kohli is
[Amit Varma]: unparalleled is in his work ethic. Yes. Remember, I remember seeing him when he was 19 years old,
[Amit Varma]: and I thought ki nahi hai, nahi hai, this kid doesn't have it. He's, you know, predominantly
[Amit Varma]: offside game and square of the wicket and all of that. And it just didn't seem to have it.
[Amit Varma]: And to transform himself into what is unquestionably the world's best batsman for a
[Amit Varma]: period of time. And the best ODI player ever is I think, just mind blowing. But I think that
[Amit Varma]: the fitness standards of the Indian team are not because of that one guy, it's because of the
[Amit Varma]: incentives of the IPL, where every run matters so much more. And you see these crazy catches,
[Amit Varma]: which would be outliers. You know, you occasionally see a Jonty Rhodes pull it off. But now...
[Guest]: So I mean, the big shift has been that Indian cricketers have become athletes,
[Guest]: the athletic, you know, earlier, they were never athletes. I mean, a bowler, a spin bowler,
[Guest]: not a fast bowler in India would be a great fielder of his own bowling, but not otherwise.
[Guest]: You know. And so, I think that we used to always marvel. I mean, when I My first match,
[Guest]: I remember, Brian Booth, 1964, which I watched live. Brian Booth, you know, his throws from
[Guest]: the deep. I mean, we would If the throw came straight to the wicket-keeper, the entire stadium
[Guest]: would applaud. And if an Indian player threw it, my God, there would be like unstinted applause.
[Guest]: Because, you know, the arms were weak. The speed was not as good. Tiger Pathaudi was called Tiger
[Guest]: because he was so fleet-footed. So, any Those were exceptions. Now today, if you don't The
[Guest]: poor fielder is the exception. Not the good fielder. The standards have gone up so high.
[Amit Varma]: The poor fielder is not even the exception because you'll never see him. He won't be in the team.
[Guest]: Exactly. And especially in white-ball cricket, so, there's no chance. There's no chance. So,
[Guest]: I think that has been a big shift that And it's all come down to
[Guest]: reaching a certain value proposition for yourself. If you're a terrific batsman,
[Guest]: and you're a poor fielder, you may still not get a value which you feel you deserve or actually
[Guest]: which you should get. I'm talking of a value for an IPL team or, you know, one of those.
[Guest]: If you're a terrific fast bowler, but you can't feel you're letting the ball go through between
[Guest]: your legs and can't bend down, you might not be selected. You know, you might be skillful,
[Guest]: but you might not be selected. And if you are selected, you might still not get optimum value
[Guest]: for what you could have got otherwise. So, that has also started, you know, kind of playing on
[Guest]: the minds of people. And let's also factor in one thing which has not yet happened. It could happen
[Guest]: in the future. The Indian cricket establishment does not allow its cricketers to play overseas
[Guest]: in other leagues while it invites all other cricketers, right? There's a ban, especially
[Guest]: for those who are eligible. I mean, you can have a retired cricketer going and playing some T10 or
[Guest]: something, that's fine. But if they somebody goes and appeals that Restraint of trade.
[Guest]: Restraint of trade, it could happen that they'll be allowed Then you'll find that more cricketers
[Guest]: are in demand, you know, and they can go and play here, there, anywhere. Those who don't get into
[Guest]: the IPL teams and are not part of the Indian team, what do they do for those 2-3 months?
[Guest]: They might want livelihood. So, that is still not being permitted. So, that could change in
[Guest]: the future. So, more demand will be there for, you know, more cricketers. So, I mean,
[Guest]: it might affect international cricket and the itinerary of how cricket is played. That's a
[Guest]: different matter. But I'm just saying that the whole shift has happened because there are more
[Guest]: opportunities. Careers could be short-lived, you know. There'll be more dead bodies on the
[Guest]: floor because other younger players have come in and they've replaced those who are not delivering.
[Amit Varma]: Or they could be longer-lived because people who are there are just much fitter than an
[Guest]: earlier generation was. Yeah. But I'm saying that you will need to keep performing all the time,
[Guest]: you know. You know, you could get a two-year period where a guy is not doing well and say,
[Guest]: no, he has a lot of class. That may not happen now. You know, it's not easy to happen now.
[Guest]: There'll be questions asked immediately because somebody else has come in making a flurry of runs
[Guest]: or taking wickets. And you say, hey, you know. And it's become competitive. People are more
[Guest]: results-driven. There are more results happening in matches. Matches are producing more
[Amit Varma]: Even test matches, 75-77% results. I believe that the standard of cricket overall, not just T20,
[Amit Varma]: has just gone up over the last 15 years. And I think T20 is the reason because contrary to what
[Amit Varma]: people said back in the day that, oh, it'll just be a slugfest, bowlers will suffer.
[Amit Varma]: I think batsmen have had to lift their skills because, hey, less balls to play with. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, you can't waste any balls. So your attacking skills have gone through the roof.
[Amit Varma]: And bowlers, their skills have gone through the roof because bowlers still decide matches,
[Guest]: no matter what form of the game that you play. Of course.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just India's fast bowlers, but the development of great spinners
[Amit Varma]: and what they bring to the table, I think, is also off the charts. And you
[Amit Varma]: see that in test cricket as well. I, you know, did an episode with Gideon Hay and Prem Panikkar.
[Amit Varma]: And Gideon made a fascinating observation about the ODI World Cup before the last one,
[Unknown]: where he said that if you watched that ODI World Cup
[Guest]: 2015.
[Amit Varma]: 2015 World Cup, where he said, if you watched that World Cup, the good teams,
[Amit Varma]: they are batting like it's a T20 and bowling like it's a test match.
[Guest]: Absolutely. It's a fantastic observation. He's absolutely right. So what has happened?
[Guest]: So what has happened is, it's compelled every cricketer now, who wants to reach anywhere,
[Guest]: or even get into the higher or upper echelons of domestic cricket, you have to be far more
[Guest]: skillful. You have to be far more inventive. You have to improvise a lot more. I mean,
[Guest]: we never heard of carrom ball, you know, spin or cross seam bowling. I mean, it may have been there.
[Guest]: But otherwise, you look at any coaching manual of the past, they would tell the fast bowlers
[Guest]: to grip the seam in a certain way, which was an upright seam and move your fingers around
[Guest]: for in-swing or out-swing. But now, fast bowlers are trying everything. They are trying a knuckleball
[Guest]: also. They are bowling at 110. Fast bowlers earlier bowled fast, you know. And Gavaskar made a comment,
[Guest]: very interesting one. He says, in my days, fast bowlers bowled fast, very fast or very, very fast.
[Guest]: You know, that was the kind of bowling we faced. But now, even in test cricket,
[Guest]: with so much protective gear available, yes, we've had an unfortunate incident of Phil Yu's,
[Guest]: you know, getting hit and losing his life, which is very unfortunate. But there's one of the reasons,
[Guest]: you know, people like us, journalists and experts end up being very critical that,
[Guest]: hey, batsman is playing recklessly. But actually, what has happened is, psychologically,
[Guest]: with so much protective gear, he's willing to take that risk because the threat of getting hit has reduced.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, earlier, he was curbing himself from a natural shot that he had in his armory
[Guest]: to score runs for apart from the fact that he might lose his wicket, but he was prepared to take
[Guest]: the risk. But what if I miss? I'll get hit on the head or the body or something and I might lose out
[Guest]: on the next match. And that prevented or stopped them from taking the risk. Today, those risks are
[Guest]: being taken by almost every team, except in dire situations, dire crisis, when you have to bat out
[Guest]: periods of play in a test match or save a test match. And therefore, the commentary is always,
[Guest]: he's playing real cricket or old-fashioned cricket and all, which is such humbug, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Which is humbug because you do whatever has a maximum expected value in a situation.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes, you know, I remember a test match where AB de Villiers and I think Faf du Plessis
[Amit Varma]: just, you know, played at this or Hashim Amla, I think, for a while, batted at this extremely
[Amit Varma]: slow strike rate of 20 because they needed to save a match. And you will have similar situations
[Amit Varma]: where batsmen are just going for it, not because they are reckless, but because the expected value
[Amit Varma]: of aggression is so much more. And everything is, you know, the situation in that sense.
[Guest]: And look at what's happened. I mean, the Australians brought about a shift there.
[Guest]: The West Indians, in many ways, the great West Indies team, there was a bit of a negative way
[Guest]: in which they played. Not the way they played, but the fast bowlers, they would bowl 65, 70
[Guest]: overs in a day because, you know, then they had to bring in the 90-over thing. The Australians,
[Guest]: when they became a great team, post-Border, they started scoring at 330, 340, 350 runs a day.
[Guest]: You set up the match on day one, you know, if you are batting first.
[Guest]: You got Adam Gilchrist coming at number six or seven who puts you the next day into a position
[Guest]: from which you can't lose. So, they kept winning match after match and series after series.
[Guest]: And just changed the, you know, the way Test cricket would be played and became so much more
[Guest]: enjoyable. Now, a lot of teams, I mean, if you score at less than 2.8 or 2.75, you're actually
[Amit Varma]: not playing well. You might end up losing the match. Yeah. The more balls you face, the more
[Amit Varma]: likely it is that you're going to lose your wicket at some point. Very difficult. Like it can happen
[Guest]: in England or, you know, suddenly you had a collapse. So, then you have to see out a session
[Guest]: that's different. But by and large, the thinking today is that at least three runs in over, you
[Guest]: know, 90 overs, 2.75, 2.80, 300 in a day is what is needed for me to set up the match in an attempt
[Amit Varma]: to win it. What's also happened is that the orthodoxy is being redefined. Like I remember
[Amit Varma]: watching the Under-19 World Cup two World Cups ago when India lost in the final to West Indies.
[Amit Varma]: I think it must have been 2017 when Rishabh Pant was in the side opening with Ishaan Kishan and
[Amit Varma]: Armaan Jaffer, Sarfaraz Khan, all those guys were there. And I remember watching Armaan Jaffer
[Amit Varma]: play these beautiful innings where it struck me that he was playing incredibly unorthodox strokes
[Amit Varma]: like reverse sweeps or whatever and making them look like they're out of the textbook. Like it
[Amit Varma]: was so natural and reflexive to him. He's not trying something special. It's part of his armory
[Amit Varma]: baked into his reflexes because he's practiced it from when he was 12 and not, you know,
[Guest]: learnt it as an adult for a particular situation. Coaching methods have also changed. I mean,
[Guest]: Gavaskar, by his coach, would have been told never to hit the ball in the air. Today's coaches,
[Guest]: if they tell a youngster don't hit the ball in the air, he'll change the coach because he's
[Guest]: watching IPL and ODIs and saying, if I don't hit the ball in the air, where will I score runs from?
[Guest]: You know, so you have to learn to improvise and make that adjustment within your own game,
[Guest]: you know, and it's become mandatory. You cannot not do it. That's become the big change.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, if you hit only in the V, they'll put fielders in the V and then you're done,
[Amit Varma]: you're finished. You're gone. You're gone. So you mentioned an interesting thing a while ago,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, gives me a segue to my next question where you spoke about how if Indians
[Amit Varma]: are allowed to play overseas leagues, they'll have more leagues and that might affect international
[Amit Varma]: cricket. And there's a part of me which is thinking that maybe that's a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I say that is that when cricket is between nations, it's bound up with a lot of
[Amit Varma]: tribalism. It can often seem like what Orville called war minus the shooting. And I understand
[Amit Varma]: that tribalism to a certain extent is, you know, baked into every sport, you have your team. And
[Amit Varma]: even if it's a club, you know, you could form a tribe around it, though I haven't really seen
[Amit Varma]: hardcore Mumbai Indian tribes or whatever, you will support a team, but it won't be a matter
[Amit Varma]: of life and death, you won't kill someone for it, while at the level of countries is different.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm wondering how you see that evolving over a period of time, because I think it's a healthy
[Amit Varma]: shift, all these international cricketers playing together, at least those older tribes not
[Amit Varma]: mattering so much. And you know, when you look at the journey of Indian cricket, you know, we used
[Amit Varma]: to have the quadrangular and the pentangular, which was played on a basis of Hindus versus
[Amit Varma]: Muslims versus Europeans versus whatever, which was actually explicitly tribal.
[Amit Varma]: Parsis also. Parsis also and Mahatma Gandhi hated cricket for this reason, apparently.
[Amit Varma]: It's a good reason, but it's also a great sport. And so how have you sort of seen this changing
[Amit Varma]: over all these years, in the sense that I would imagine that cricketers except those handful of
[Amit Varma]: elites who were lucky enough to say play county cricket in England or whatever, would be living
[Amit Varma]: in an insular world, where they are meeting only their own types, only their own tribes, like when
[Amit Varma]: you when you watch the ugliness of some India-Pakistan matches of the past, especially when
[Amit Varma]: the media builds it up and the media is only building it up because they think there's an
[Amit Varma]: audience for it and it plays. Is that a disturbing aspect of sport that is always an undercurrent
[Amit Varma]: when sport is being played? And are we living in times where maybe it doesn't matter so much? Maybe
[Amit Varma]: that's another really bright aspect of franchise cricket, that we can see, you know, an Australian
[Amit Varma]: and Indian and Englishman and hopefully one day, inshallah, Pakistanis as well, in the same
[Guest]: dressing room, being a team together? Yeah, so I mean, it's a complex, you know, question and
[Guest]: situation and there are myriad possibilities. For instance, India-Pakistan, it's a very unusual
[Guest]: and offbeat coexistence as two cricketing nations. So we've had a series in the 50s,
[Guest]: a couple of series in the 50s, one in India, one in Pakistan, then one more in India in 62,
[Guest]: 61, 62, and then nothing for 17 years, till 78, because you've had two wars, 65 and 71, being
[Guest]: fought. And then cricket is seen as a, let's bring the countries together closer. And
[Guest]: interestingly, it's by, not by the Congress or whatever, it's the, at that point in time,
[Guest]: the Janata government, you know, which has Atal Bihari Vajpayee, who's the foreign minister,
[Guest]: who initiates this. And then we have Kargil, I mean, then we have 87, where there's eyeball
[Guest]: to eyeball confrontation on the border. And then we've got Zia-ul-Haq coming to India and,
[Guest]: you know, tensions getting deflated. And the test series brings things to normal. And then
[Guest]: it goes bad again, Kargil. And then, again, it's a BJP-led government, NDA government,
[Guest]: with Vajpayee as the prime minister and LK Erwani as the home minister, which allows the
[Guest]: Indian team, where you went to Pakistan in 2004 and 5, maybe even later.
[Guest]: I went in 2006, the one after that.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. But in 2004 and 5, and
[Amit Varma]: Great tour, yeah.
[Guest]: It was a great tour. And, you know, it didn't seem possible, but it happened. And then after
[Guest]: that, we've had no, you know, 2006, we've had no tour of Pakistan. So, it's been like hot and cold.
[Guest]: So, it, you know, the tribalism in this whole, and then the role of the media and the way passions
[Guest]: are stoked and reach boiling point is always a threat, you know, and it's not something which is
[Guest]: easily palatable, at least to me, or digestible, because I think, you know, maybe a romantic
[Guest]: notion, but there should be a slightly more loftier reason to play sport, not one-upmanship of this
[Guest]: kind. But so, it works, and sometimes it doesn't work. I am a proponent that sport should be
[Guest]: allowed, you know, between the two countries to try and reach an approachment or a level of
[Guest]: interaction, which is very important, especially when you're neighbours. So, when body line happens
[Guest]: and England and Australia almost come to war, in a sense, that is more symbolic war than real war,
[Guest]: because they're separated by, you know, several continents. Though the rivalry has become now,
[Guest]: you know, part of such great tradition and legacy, that it's played very intensely, but it's never a
[Guest]: war-like situation like there is between India and Pakistan. Whether bilateral matches themselves,
[Guest]: bilateral cricket is losing currency, it's a bit of a yes and no. So, what has happened,
[Guest]: certainly in cricket, and especially test cricket, is that, frankly, there are only three countries
[Guest]: that play test cricket to an audience which makes it worthwhile, which is India, England and
[Guest]: Australia. And these are the three, that's why the big three, and there was this, you know, conflict
[Guest]: within the ICC, because the audiences in the other countries have changed dramatically. Pakistan has
[Guest]: been very iffy ever since the terror attack on the Sri Lankans 2009. I don't even know if they've got
[Guest]: a very committed audience for test cricket. So too in the West Indies, so too in New Zealand.
[Guest]: So, ultimately, if test cricket is surviving today, it's because of these three countries.
[Guest]: And is that too many or too few to sustain the sport? You know, the money is huge,
[Guest]: because India is a huge country, the number of eyeballs is still phenomenal between India,
[Guest]: Australia and England. But the footprint of the game is not expanding where the longest
[Guest]: format is concerned. And therefore, T20 seems like the more viable option, including getting
[Guest]: into the Olympics, which has been a long-stated desire of many players, though, of course, the
[Guest]: ICC and BCCI also didn't want, you know, they lose control, at least for a mega tournament.
[Guest]: And then it affects in many ways, you know. So, I mean, this whole thing about the BCCI,
[Guest]: I personally feel that BCCI, given its current position, should be in the vanguard of protecting
[Guest]: and promoting cricket in all its formats. But they're never the leaders, you know. So, 2007,
[Guest]: for instance, when T20 World Cup was being mooted in 2005-06 and it happened in 2007,
[Guest]: India was the last country to agree to play. And therefore, you found that the big players didn't
[Guest]: go. As it happened, Dhoni led his team to victory and rewrote, you know, the future of cricket was
[Guest]: rewritten after that, because we won the T20 World Cup and then the IPL happened and then
[Guest]: whatever. But India, BCCI did not want to play that. They reluctantly agreed.
[Guest]: So, I was at a I moderated a session once in 2010, just a year before Tiger Pathodi passed
[Guest]: away, where he was It was called the Raj Singh Dungarpur Memorial Lecture. Raj Singh had passed
[Guest]: away by then. So, he ends with this thought and he had been part of the IPL Governing Council,
[Guest]: former India captain. He says, BCCI The problem is that the ICC is the voice of cricket or
[Guest]: needs to be the voice of cricket. BCCI is happy being the invoice of cricket.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know. And it was a very pungent, very telling comment. So, I think BCCI now that it's got,
[Guest]: you know, money is not the issue. You got the hottest property, the IPL. You know,
[Guest]: you got a committed following and runs into millions and millions of people. How do you
[Guest]: take the sport to the next level is really the challenge. And I'm not seeing any great
[Guest]: vision that is emerging.
[Amit Varma]: I have great apprehensions about the BCCI's current leadership. But all said and done,
[Amit Varma]: I think in the last decade, barring one area, they've done a pretty good job. That one area is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, one would have liked them to promote women's cricket much more strongly because I
[Amit Varma]: think there's great potential for building an audience there. You know
[Guest]: BCCI has done wonderfully for itself.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, for Indian cricket, it's been fantastic. The last decade and more, maybe two decades.
[Guest]: You know, they've done, apart from the shenanigans within the BCCI, you know,
[Guest]: within the board itself, that apart. But for the sport, they've done a lot. Old cricketers have
[Guest]: been rewarded, huge amounts of money given as bonuses or ex gratia payment, you know,
[Guest]: for illness, ailment. Money for players current, including right up to the junior level,
[Guest]: they're getting a lot of money to support themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And also the pipeline.
[Guest]: Pipeline.
[Guest]: Junior, India A, that's one reason, along with the IPL, why it's so deep.
[Guest]: India A tours have been fantastic, you know. And they've got some, the right people. I mean,
[Guest]: Rahul Rawat heading National Cricket Academy, India A coach, Under-19 coach. You can't ask
[Guest]: for a better deal, better situation, you know. So, I think in many ways, they've done that.
[Guest]: But I'm saying for the vision of the sport, they could do more.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, we've spent a lot of time, but there's no way I'm ending this episode
[Amit Varma]: without talking about many of the colourful characters of Indian cricket, you know,
[Amit Varma]: many of whom have chapters in your book dedicated to them, written by some really
[Amit Varma]: fine writers. I want to talk about one specific question, which is about how a player can
[Amit Varma]: sometimes in a different way, seem to become almost a template. Like if we start with Vijay
[Amit Varma]: Merchant, for example, right, the whole Bombay school of batting is from there, that whole
[Amit Varma]: Kharoos attitude that kind of comes from there. And he first becomes an icon and then becomes
[Amit Varma]: a template. And then, you know, you kind of wonder that sometimes does chasing an ideal
[Amit Varma]: become a constraint in itself that you only bat that way. And one kind of understands why
[Amit Varma]: that Kharoos kind of batting comes about and leads to, you know, Gavaskar and then in a
[Amit Varma]: more refined form, Tendulkar, because right up to Gavaskar, you're playing to the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: of the time where the team is pretty much bound to lose, where your job is not to go
[Amit Varma]: out there and be super aggressive, but just hang in there as long as you can and save
[Amit Varma]: some face and all of that. And it's also possible to then look at a number of individuals
[Amit Varma]: like a Merchant and a Gavaskar and say that and build a narrative, which is not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: true. You know, I mean, Sandeep Patil is also from Bombay and not at all in that mould.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your kind of thoughts on it? Like, I think some of this could be laziness on
[Amit Varma]: the part of cricket writers that we look at, say, a Hyderabadi wristy batsman and talk
[Amit Varma]: about the lazy elegance and compare Azharuddin to Jai Simha and, you know, that kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: Is it dangerous to sort of think like that? Or did Merchant really have that kind of a
[Amit Varma]: incredible impact that shaped an entire sort of school of batting as it's often called?
[Guest]: I think it happens, you know, I mean, there can be players who can shape a whole school,
[Guest]: you know, so the more wristy kind of batting skills come from the South more because people
[Guest]: talk about it. And imagine if you're a youngster, if you're an Azharuddin who's growing up,
[Guest]: playing for school, watching Vishi or watching Jai Simha or Abbas Ali Beg or one of these,
[Guest]: you know, and the coaches are telling you,
[Guest]: Abhi aayega na, aisa ball aayega off stump ke baar, usko Jai Simha ki tarah khilna.
[Guest]: You know, so that stays in your mind. And then you say, okay, how is, you know,
[Guest]: how does Jai Simha play or, you know, Abbas play or Vishi play? So you learn the more
[Guest]: wristy kind of stroke play that is a hallmark of people from Lakshman now.
[Guest]: In Mumbai's case, you know, the first original
[Guest]: hero, iconic figure of Indian cricket is Colonel CK Naidu. And then Mohammed Nisar and Amar Singh,
[Guest]: these are the fast bowlers, not too many batsmen you talk about.
[Guest]: Then Lala Mannath comes and makes a hundred from the north. But in 1946,
[Guest]: when India go to England and, you know, merchants cause more than 2000 runs in a wet English summer,
[Guest]: and he's hailed as somebody who's got the technique, which is what English cricket thrived on,
[Guest]: you know, and the mastery of English conditions was paramount where the English writers were concerned
[Guest]: or English cricket thought leaders. And remember, a lot of literature that we got in our early years
[Guest]: was from England. England has been profuse in cricket writing. Not so much Australia,
[Guest]: certainly not the West Indies, not Pakistan, perhaps India now in the last 20, 25, 30 years.
[Guest]: So what the English people thought became a paragon of virtue, cricketing virtue.
[Guest]: And then he was immensely successful in Mumbai. He had the advantages of
[Guest]: having his own personal coach because he was a well-to-do man, he was from a business family and
[Guest]: etc. etc. But he became a role model for the way he played. I remember once speaking to,
[Guest]: I met Vijay Merchant a couple of times in his second innings, as he used to call it,
[Guest]: when he was associated with the blind. Madhav Mantri was a great admirer of
[Guest]: Vijay Merchant. I asked him once, I said, what did you like about Vijay Merchant?
[Guest]: He said, everything. His judgement of length, line, how to leave the ball,
[Guest]: how to minimise risk and therefore, by implication, optimise opportunities if there was no risk.
[Guest]: And he would go gaga over his late cut. He said, nobody played that late cut like that.
[Guest]: Now imagine Madhav Mantri is Sunil Gavaskar's uncle,
[Guest]: uncle. Yeah. Mama's brother. And when young Gavaskar is growing up,
[Guest]: his ears must have been filled with stories about Vijay Merchant and what
[Guest]: batting meant by his mama. And this is what he did. This is what he did in England. This is how
[Guest]: you should bat. This is what happens. In Mumbai, it rains so much. Kanga League, when you play,
[Guest]: these are the pitches. You can't take these, this. You can take that. So, Gavaskar is already
[Guest]: growing into that school. And when Gavaskar is growing into that school, all the people from
[Guest]: Chickalwadi and Dadar and wherever else, a young Vengsarkar is growing up. He's also learning about
[Guest]: from Vasu Paranjpe or whatever. You know, all that is fine. Don't throw a bat. Look at how
[Guest]: Gavaskar bats. Look at how Merchant used to bat. So, the culture develops. Of course, there are
[Guest]: people like Sandeep Patil. But Sandeep Patil's father himself was, you know, he used to hit over
[Guest]: the treetop. He was that big, big hitter. So, in his house, he emulated his father.
[Guest]: But the wider cultural thing was that Mumbai opportunities to bat are few. Therefore,
[Guest]: very strong on batsmanship, not so much on bowling, Mumbai cricket. You waste that opportunity,
[Guest]: you take the long journey home by train, carrying your kid bag. And your next match, your next,
[Guest]: you know, your coach might not even send you to bat. If you bat at number three or four and you've
[Guest]: thrown your wicket away, next match, you may be eight or nine. So, all of these kind of,
[Guest]: you know, crystallize into a certain cultural template. But of course, it's not so rigid as
[Guest]: to only this works and not that. When you see a Rohit Sharma bat today, he's got fantastic
[Guest]: technique. You know, he's a typical true blue Mumbiker as one understands from the stereotype.
[Guest]: But he's also a new age modern cricketer who can, you know, who will bat like a Viv Richards,
[Guest]: the way he bats in white ball cricket, or even in test cricket. You know, he's got the big shots,
[Guest]: he's got the temerity to take on spinners, fast bowlers. Tendulkar, of course, was the one who
[Guest]: straddled both white ball cricket and test red ball cricket like none before him, or perhaps
[Guest]: even after him. So, there has been a tradition which develops over a period of time. And then,
[Guest]: of course, more embellishments are added to the tradition and changes are made
[Guest]: as the ethos changes and the sport changes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, it's fascinating. You mentioned about how, you know, if a kid goes out there,
[Amit Varma]: he's got one chance, he may not get another chance if he wastes this one. So, what is your incentive?
[Amit Varma]: Your incentive is to minimize risk. So, one can, you know, the whole school of thought can just
[Amit Varma]: evolve from the incentives as well as the role models that you have. And I think you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: somewhere that Sandeep Patil in his house had an actual aeroplane on his terrace and it served
[Guest]: as a bar. See, Sandeep was a flamboyant, you know, flamboyant personality. Even now, he's a lovely
[Guest]: guy to meet. He was the first cricketer I interviewed in 1980. He was selected for the
[Guest]: tour of Australia for the magazine, Sportsweek magazine. So, you know, and I went and spent time
[Guest]: with him. He showed me the plane. And the plane was a bar. You know, and he was 24 or something.
[Guest]: I said, wow, what a guy. We are almost of the same age. I may be a few months older than him.
[Guest]: But, and, you know, it was very fascinating. And then he went and got a smashing 100 at Adelaide
[Guest]: after being hit on the head. So, he became an even more colorful character. He couldn't hold
[Guest]: his place on the team. He had fitness issues. You know, in those days, you could have a throwing
[Guest]: arm which didn't work and still be in the team, as he would tell you himself now, honestly,
[Guest]: that he's saying, otherwise, I wouldn't be in the team. But yeah, so all kinds of people were
[Guest]: make up a team, as we know. What's interesting to me, and from an Indian point of view is that
[Guest]: the Indian cricket team or the dressing room is a microcosm of Indian life.
[Guest]: So, there is a Bombay school of thought in the team. There is a South India thing,
[Guest]: more and more North India than just Delhi. You know, and Tiger Pataudi mentioned this,
[Guest]: and this is something which is reflected about the 60s, or when he took over in Tiger's Tale.
[Guest]: He says, the biggest challenge I had was these guys were all speaking in their own
[Amit Varma]: different languages, you know. And this happened for a long time,
[Amit Varma]: because even up to the 80s and the 90s, you know, like, first of all, you had a zonal selection
[Amit Varma]: board. So, there were these quotas and... How absurd it seems now.
[Amit Varma]: How absurd it seems now. And then you had, I mean, the classic illustration of this,
[Amit Varma]: of course, is Kapil and Gavaskar, the rivalry between them. Though the interesting thing is
[Amit Varma]: that they also had great regard for each other. Like, in fact, you know, Dikki Ratnagar writes
[Amit Varma]: in your book on Kapil, that in that Melbourne test in 1981, when Kapil took 5 for 28 and we
[Amit Varma]: won by 59 runs, when he was asked about what motivated him. Incidentally, a match in which
[Guest]: Gavaskar almost cost us the match by staging a walkout. Yeah, yeah. When Lillie abused him.
[Guest]: And he almost forced, of course, he regrets that action now. But then Kapil Dev came and...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And Kapil said, quote, I have to do it for Sunil, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another incident where at Tunbridge Wells during that 175, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when the innings is done, Sunny meets him halfway with a glass of water.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Because he doesn't want him to wait to drink his water. So, there are these beautiful touching
[Amit Varma]: moments.
[Guest]: But it was a very strong, as what I remember, mutual admiration society. I know, I got to know
[Guest]: both of them quite well. Sunil, in fact, also became the editor of Sportsweek magazine after
[Guest]: he had quit. So, I worked and he would come with his handwritten editorial to start with
[Guest]: and submit it. And, you know, he would come maybe once or twice a week, but always a little moody,
[Guest]: but always full of great thoughts. If you could kind of incite him into talking about
[Guest]: whatever, you know. Kapil, always warm, you know. Not very expressive in the sense that
[Guest]: you want to elicit something from him, you know. The power of expression was obviously greater
[Guest]: with Sunil. But Kapil was, in his own way, he would communicate. The funny thing about Kapil,
[Guest]: as you know, which, you know, Shastri writes and he tells me also that you asked him any question,
[Guest]: even in Hindi in a press conference, he would insist on talking in English.
[Guest]: All his replies would be only in English.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lovely anecdote in your book where I think in 78, 79, when he's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: waiting for the team to Pakistan to be announced and he's being interviewed by Doordarshan,
[Amit Varma]: by Rajsingh Dungarpur on the CCI lawns. And Dungarpur asks him,
[Amit Varma]: congratulations Kapil, you must be looking forward to your first tour. And Kapil says, no.
[Amit Varma]: And Rajsingh says, what, you aren't looking forward to the tour? And Kapil says, no,
[Guest]: I don't want to look forward. He was captain in 1985-86 to Australia. There was a press conference
[Guest]: at, I think, Ambassador Hotel on the terrace before the team's departure. So, Kapil, what do
[Guest]: you want to, you know, what do you think about the tour? He says, I want to come back Victorian.
[Amit Varma]: Very spontaneous, great fun, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Which is completely the wrong description for him because he was anything but Victorian.
[Amit Varma]: There's so many fascinating characters in Indian cricket. Just reading your book
[Amit Varma]: again reminded me of that. Like, you know, the previous histories I've read like Nihir Bose's
[Amit Varma]: history and Guha's history. It's just so filled with these colourful people. Veenu Mankad and
[Amit Varma]: you've reproduced Rajan Bala's profile of him. Another person who is number one, not talked
[Amit Varma]: about in the way that he would today. Like whenever I make my all-time Indian 11, I always
[Amit Varma]: have Veenu Mankad at number six. Because, you know, great left arm bowler, great batsman. And
[Amit Varma]: I remember as a young journalist, I looked up the stats as young journalists tend to do.
[Amit Varma]: And I looked at Veenu Mankad's stats and Pauli Umbrigar's stats, his contemporary all-rounder.
[Amit Varma]: And if you just look at the stats, you think that, oh, Umbrigar is far ahead. But then you go a
[Amit Varma]: little deeper. And you realise that Mankad missed the best years of his career because of the war.
[Amit Varma]: That, you know, if you look at the context of his victories, that India's first five test victories
[Amit Varma]: had a big role played in them by Veenu Mankad. If you look at how good he was against fastballing,
[Amit Varma]: while of Pauli Umbrigar, there are, you know, contrary stories told and you kind of realise that.
[Amit Varma]: So it's very interesting that when you speak about the history of Indian cricket,
[Amit Varma]: you're actually, in a sense, dividing it in two parts. One part is that part,
[Amit Varma]: which people haven't seen on television. We are relying on stories. We are relying on
[Amit Varma]: context. There's only so much you can make out from the scorecards, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So these people aren't almost real people. They're like mythological figures.
[Guest]: Absolutely, Amit. And I had, you know, I mean, one of my regrets is that I didn't get enough
[Guest]: material of the 50s, you know, from 47 onwards. I didn't want to go beyond or pre-47. I wanted
[Guest]: this to be a journey from 1947 and the decade of the 50s till Veenubhai Mankad retires.
[Guest]: Look at his achievements. He's got 100 against John Batman's team, which went on to become the
[Guest]: Invincibles in that series. The matches were lost, but he made 100. He's taken wickets against that
[Guest]: great Australian team. He is the architect of India's first ever test victory against England
[Guest]: at Madras. He is the architect of India's first victory over Pakistan, which is a great emotional
[Guest]: high, as you know. I mean, there are only two test matches in the history of cricket named
[Guest]: after the player. One is Mankad's test of 1952, Lords. The other is Botham's test of
[Guest]: Headingley of 1981. He has got a first wicket partnership with Pankaj Roy, which stood for like
[Guest]: decades and decades from 1955 till maybe early 2000, you know. And the influence he had on players
[Guest]: and team, he was captain, he was not captain. He was a bit of a rebel, you know. He had a mind of
[Guest]: his own. He had a sharp tongue, as one gathers. I spoke to the late Ashok Mankad, his son. You know,
[Guest]: Ashok used to always refer to him as Vinu Bhai. He wouldn't say my father or my dad and this, that.
[Guest]: He would say Vinu Bhai. And he said, there was nothing that Vinu Bhai didn't know about cricket.
[Guest]: He knew everything. He says the greatest quality in him was he would read batsman's mind. Now,
[Guest]: that's a way of putting it. But he was one jump ahead. When we watch a Shane Vaughan or an RR
[Guest]: Vaughan or an R Ashwin bowl today, it's exactly that. You know, they're plotting and planning
[Guest]: one delivery to another. Something is brewing in their mind and then, yes, they will get hit,
[Guest]: you know, something will happen. But the effort always to get the better It's an ego battle
[Guest]: with the batsman. And then, the role is reversed when he's batting. I mean, apart from the great
[Guest]: Kapil Dev and again the stats and all that, but I can't see how Vinu Mankad, who in my opinion,
[Guest]: was an even greater personality from 1947 period till, say, 60, than even Vijay Merchant,
[Guest]: for his deeds and his achievements, you know, how he cannot be part of a great Indian all-time 11.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to end the episode later on when we end the episode by asking you to name your
[Amit Varma]: Indian all-time 11. And I'll share mine as well. But before that, let's continue talking about
[Amit Varma]: these great players very quickly. And I'll link them all to a question. And I have a question
[Amit Varma]: here about the spin quartet. And you have some excellent writing in your book about the quartet.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is this, that when we look at the past, we are essentially cherry-picking
[Amit Varma]: moments and memories. Correct. And it is likely that we will remember the highlights. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: While when we look at the present, we don't cherry-pick the highlights. We know the whole
[Amit Varma]: thing, what's and all, right. And that brings a danger that we can sometimes romanticize the past.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. And we can romanticize the quartet, like much as they are, of course, legends,
[Amit Varma]: and I love reading about them and all of that. It also seems to me that, like in my all-time
[Amit Varma]: Indian 11, there's no one from the quartet because, you know, Vinu bhai is there, so you don't need
[Amit Varma]: Bedi. And I'm picking Ashwin as my off-spinner and that's just what it is. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if I had to have a leg-spinner, I'd, you know, pick Kumle. Yeah. So is that also a danger then
[Amit Varma]: of looking at the past, which also might do injustice to the people themselves? Because
[Amit Varma]: then if you ignore their warts, you are actually doing an injustice to them because you're looking
[Amit Varma]: at them almost as mythical figures and not acknowledging the real human challenges that
[Amit Varma]: they faced and they overcame. Like, you know, Prasanna in those overseas tours of New Zealand
[Amit Varma]: and Australia and the way he bowled and all of that. Incredible achievement. But, you know,
[Guest]: what's your take on this? So I think, yes, there is the pitfall. I mean, you can look at them with,
[Guest]: you know, those tinted glasses and say everything about them was great. Perhaps not. You know,
[Guest]: I mean, you've got Kumble and you've got Ashwin and you've got Harbhajan, who's got 400 plus
[Guest]: wickets. They've been some stellar performers. How do you, how would they compare? I think,
[Guest]: obviously, there's a romanticization of their performances. There's also,
[Guest]: you know, distance and nostalgia makes everything look warmer and there's a glow about it.
[Guest]: But having said that, I think one has to look at it, you know, on harder or sharper scrutiny,
[Guest]: you'll find that there are great virtues. For instance, Prasanna's performances in the 60s
[Guest]: overseas in Australia, in 67, in New Zealand, they were fantastic. He picked up so many wickets.
[Guest]: Bishan Singh Bedi. And look at their domestic performances. Chandrashekhar,
[Guest]: winning a match on his own at the Oval in 1971 is a seminal moment, as we know.
[Guest]: Almost unplayable on his day on Indian pitches, certainly. But look at what his handicap was,
[Guest]: how he came. I think also, when he worked in Venkat Raghavan, perhaps the most underrated,
[Guest]: most unsung, came back at the age of 38 and also bowled. He just suffered in comparison
[Guest]: because Prasanna was around and I think Prasanna was favoured by Pataudi, you know, as the,
[Guest]: perhaps he thought he was the better bowler. Don't forget, Prasanna also missed out five years.
[Guest]: He made his debut in 62 and then came back again in 66, 67 because he was studying. He was becoming
[Guest]: an engineer. Incidentally, the literacy levels of the Indian cricket team used to be very high
[Guest]: till 20 years back. So many engineers, yeah. So many engineers. Graduates were almost everybody.
[Guest]: Now, I think, apart from Ashwin, they might, it'll be very difficult to find another graduate.
[Guest]: But that's also the way the game has changed, you know, with so many people getting in at 18, 19,
[Guest]: nevertheless. So, Bedi, Prasanna and Chandrasekhar and Venkat Raghavan, they came at a certain time
[Guest]: when India was really struggling to win matches and especially with, even look at the background.
[Guest]: Vinu Mankad had retired. Jasu Patel had retired. Gulam Ahmed had retired. They were
[Guest]: very big bowlers in the 1950s. The big loss was Subhash Gupte, who should have been on the 1961-62
[Guest]: to the West Indies. He wasn't because, you know, he and Kripal Singh
[Amit Varma]: That phone call incident.
[Guest]: Phone call incident with some girl and, you know, the selectors took,
[Guest]: umbrillated, you know, their hotel room and those were the ways in which selections were done.
[Guest]: So, he quit in a half. He went and, you know, settled down in the West Indies. So, there was
[Guest]: a void of match-winning spinners. Yes, there was Bapu Nadkarni and Chandu Borde and Salim Durrani,
[Guest]: who was in and out of the team. But when these guys came together and Pataudi,
[Guest]: in a sense, masterminded, okay, let's get an all-spin attack and, you know, he'll open the
[Guest]: bowling or Gavaskar or somebody else will come and bowl one or two overs, roll the ball along
[Guest]: the ground. You've not seen those matches. I've been as a youngster, you know, and they would,
[Guest]: after every ball, the fielders would roll the ball back to the bowler to get the shine off.
[Guest]: Yeah, you wanted the spinners off.
[Guest]: You wanted the spinners off on in the third or fourth over. And then,
[Guest]: there would be this roar across the stadium if Bedi got the ball or Chandra. And, you know,
[Guest]: when they ran into bowl, there would be this bowl, that sound would come. You know,
[Guest]: 30,000 people screaming. So, that created a certain aura, which is magnificent. And then,
[Guest]: they charmed everybody wherever they went. Because these kind of spinners were not seen in England
[Guest]: or Australia with so much success. Of course, they also had their great spinners, you know,
[Guest]: Underwood and Ashley Mallet. But not so many numbers, so many of different types. So,
[Guest]: it just added to the whole romance. But I think that they were 800-plus wickets between them,
[Guest]: you know. And I think with better fielding, we all talk about the great fielding setup,
[Guest]: which was also there, Wadekar, Solkar, Abed Ali, Venkat Raghavan himself. But they all came,
[Guest]: I mean, fielding standards, when you look at their averages, you'll find that they are 29-30-31.
[Guest]: If the outfielding was as good as it is today, it would have been better. Some of the lofted
[Guest]: shots which should have been taken would have been caught. So, I think that there's a lot of merit.
[Guest]: You know, ultimately, you can't compare players from one generation to another. That is always
[Guest]: the danger. So, it's not to say that Harbhajan is not a good bowler or Ashwin is not a fantastic
[Guest]: bowler. And Kumble, of course, has got his own monumental stature or status in the game.
[Guest]: I think that they provided that richness of talent and skill, which made India synonymous
[Guest]: with great spin. Not that there were no spinners earlier. There was Vinu Mankar, there was Jassu,
[Guest]: there was Gulam Ahmed, there was Subhash Gupte. 50s and 60s, 65 onwards or 66 onwards is when
[Guest]: this quartet comes into play. And for about 10-12 years, they hold sway.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, if people give credit to Clive Lloyd for figuring out that in West Indies should
[Amit Varma]: play to their strengths and bowl with four fast bowlers, equal credit to Pataudi a few years
[Amit Varma]: before that for getting out the whole quartet plan. And as you said, you know, the incentives
[Amit Varma]: again, we had great close-in fielders because we had great spinners. So, much greater demand
[Amit Varma]: for close-in fielders like Solkar and Yajubendra Singh and all two kind of
[Guest]: I think Pataudi was very clever and very decisive. You know, I mean, some people would argue that
[Guest]: the short leg fielding position was actually devised by him, where Solkar excelled. Because
[Guest]: before that, you don't find short legs, you find backward short leg.
[Guest]: Oh, fascinating.
[Guest]: You know, not so much as forward short leg.
[Amit Varma]: So, here's a question about Pataudi. I think in some ways, if you again just look at the
[Amit Varma]: bare biographical details, it's easy to be unfair to Pataudi. Because what do you see,
[Amit Varma]: like you have a great chapter in your book called Merchant Bags His Tiger by Mihir Bose,
[Amit Varma]: where he talks about how Vijay Merchant as head of selectors, you know, got Pataudi kicked off
[Amit Varma]: from the captaincy. And one speculation is it is because if Iftikar Ali Pataudi, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Mansoor's father had, you know, treated Merchant badly at one point in time. But regardless,
[Amit Varma]: he loses the captaincy, it goes to Wadikar and Wadikar promptly wins in 71 in West Indies and
[Amit Varma]: England, Seminole, Ipokil, all of that. And suddenly in your mind's eye, Wadikar is a great
[Amit Varma]: captain and who is Pataudi? But actually, Pataudi was not just a brilliant captain,
[Amit Varma]: brilliant batsman, brilliant thinker of the game. I know you admire him a lot. So,
[Guest]: tell me a little bit about him.
[Guest]: Pataudi, I admired from the time I got to know about cricket. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: your favourites keep changing. My first favourites were Rohan Kanhai, Garth McKenzie, Graham McKenzie,
[Guest]: and then suddenly became very quickly, swiftly, Yaseema and Pataudi. And I had this great desire
[Guest]: to meet him. He used to be living in Bombay in those days, maybe early 70s. You know,
[Guest]: he used to be always at the Bombay gym, you know, playing snooker or playing sports. He was a
[Guest]: multi-talented sportsperson. And I knew somebody who was working there, some distant relative of
[Guest]: mine. I said, I must somehow have to meet Pataudi. He says he comes every afternoon for a tipple,
[Guest]: for a drink or a beer, glass of beer, and then he, you know, whatever, he has lunch and go. I said,
[Guest]: you have to get me in. He said, but you're not allowed. You know, under 18, you're not allowed.
[Guest]: I was not 18. So, I said, listen, what I'll do is, I'll make a false side-lock, side-burn.
[Guest]: And I had a, my moustache had sprouted. I said, I'll darken it. You have to smuggle me in. I'll
[Guest]: look 18 plus. So, he smuggled me in at the Bombay gym. And I had a scrap of paper with a little pen
[Guest]: and I went up to him. He was sitting with his, you know, this cap he used to wear at a slant.
[Guest]: And he was smoking a cigarette and not looking at me. And I said,
[Guest]: sir, autograph. And he looked at me and he signed that piece of paper and went back to whatever he
[Guest]: was doing. And I didn't have to wait long because I was worried I'll get caught. So, I grabbed that
[Guest]: and I ran away. When I met him much later as a professional and I talked to him about this,
[Guest]: he had no memory of it at all. Obviously.
[Guest]: Obviously, obviously. But I asked him, I said, you know, those were I think the days when he
[Guest]: had lost his captaincy. So, I asked him, I said, you know, what were you doing? He says, no, I mean,
[Guest]: you know, I was trying to get into politics. He had misadventures of getting into politics and
[Guest]: this and that. But, you know, I always wanted to play. I didn't want to tour. So, I didn't go to
[Guest]: England in 1974. I didn't go to the West Indies. I think he was obviously miffed that his captaincy
[Guest]: was taken away. But he came back in Captain India in that fantastic series against West Indies,
[Guest]: which we lost 3-2. But he just breathed life into it with his captaincy and the bowling of these
[Guest]: series, this quartet. And I kept, you know, asking him that what was it about you and
[Guest]: merchant that somehow didn't work out? Why did he? He's saying some things are best forgotten.
[Guest]: You know, I moved on. That's it. So, Tiger Pathodi was very enigmatic. I met him many times
[Guest]: in Delhi, been to his house. At one point in time, I was planning to do a book along with him
[Guest]: and Rahul Rawat and Rajsingh Dungarpur on the history of Indian cricket. In each one of them,
[Guest]: doing different eras. You know, and he was very excited. It didn't happen.
[Guest]: And, you know, as I mentioned that last, the meeting I had was that Rajsingh Dungarpur,
[Guest]: he had this great sense of humour, you know, where he said ICC is like the voice of cricket
[Guest]: and BCCI is the voice of cricket. He had these smart one-liners, very sharp in his observation,
[Guest]: very great, dull sense of humour, not very elaborate. You know, you sometimes think
[Guest]: he's not saying anything, but it carried a lot of weight. So, he was that kind of a personality.
[Guest]: And when you look at it from a player's point of view, imagine a guy playing with one eye,
[Guest]: it's insane. Colin Milburn had a car accident, lost an eye. He was an England batsman. He came
[Guest]: back and he couldn't last one test match, you know, and he gave up. So, for him to play with
[Guest]: one eye, I mean, there have been people, Azeem Hafeez used to be a Pakistani bowler with two
[Guest]: fingers less in one hand and he bowled. But sight is a problem. B.S. Chandrashekhar, polio-affected
[Guest]: hand, you know. But sight is everything in sport. For a batsman. For a batsman. And to survive,
[Guest]: his batting average, when you talked of the figures not being flattering, he made six centuries,
[Guest]: ten centuries and the batting average was about 40, except for his last two, three years. And
[Amit Varma]: his last years can be misleading. Like even with Gundappa Vishwanath, you know, people used to say,
[Amit Varma]: oh, his average is in 50. So, I remember when I was in Cricken 4, I actually tracked his career
[Amit Varma]: record and it was above 50 for most of it. He and Gavaskar were neck and neck. They were
[Amit Varma]: neck and neck. For the five, seven, eight years of their life, you know. Right at the end,
[Guest]: he had a bad batch and it fell away. So, you know. But that also is, in a sense, Gavaskar's greatness.
[Guest]: You know, to keep the ambition alive and the grind and the, you know, I must, I mean, relentless.
[Amit Varma]: And also, as we discussed, to quit at his peak.
[Amit Varma]: And to quit at his peak.
[Guest]: With that 96.
[Guest]: Yes. You know, I mean, Gavaskar is a phenomenon. He's a phenomenon. I mean, you know, he's not
[Guest]: a drudge batsman. You know, a lot of people mistake that, you know, he was a,
[Guest]: ek end pakad ke, you know, he would do, just keep accumulating runs. That was not. He was a
[Guest]: terrific stroke player. He had all the strokes in his arm. He was, you know, virtuosity, batting
[Amit Varma]: virtuosity personified. Technical virtuosity. I often think that when we think of cricketers,
[Amit Varma]: you know, we put them in these slots and we think of them as just that. For example,
[Amit Varma]: when people talk about Tendulkar and Dravid, you know, for them, Tendulkar is a great natural
[Amit Varma]: talent and Dravid is a great technique. And I'm like, the opposite is also true.
[Amit Varma]: Of course.
[Amit Varma]: Tendulkar's technique is incredible and Dravid is so talented.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And to, you know, to pigeonhole them like that.
[Guest]: You know, sometimes they have to adjust within their own,
[Guest]: what are you doing in this team? What's your role in this team, you know?
[Guest]: So, that's something that you have to, I mean, look at Gavaskar's series against
[Guest]: West Indies in 1983. There are shades of everything in that series.
[Guest]: That 29th hundred where he attacked the West Indies.
[Guest]: 121 against West Indies, Delhi. Then he makes 236, which is completely different.
[Guest]: Completely different.
[Guest]: Zero for two. He walks out to bat at number four. He's not opening the innings.
[Amit Varma]: And even there, apparently, it was politics because I think Kirmani was
[Amit Varma]: not out on 60-something and he hoped to get his hundred and people thought Gavaskar can go on to
[Amit Varma]: a triple hundred. But if I remember correctly, Kapil, who was captain, declared because there
[Amit Varma]: was some point system for man of the series and he was ahead and I think he didn't want
[Amit Varma]: some marshal or somebody, somebody in the West Indies team to go ahead of him.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I can't remember that. No.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Yeah. No. Okay. It's a vague memory.
[Guest]: Yeah. No, no, I can't remember that. But 236, I do remember. Zero for two.
[Amit Varma]: No doubt.
[Guest]: Yeah. And, you know, he used to, he had a room in Connemara. Though he was not captain,
[Guest]: he had a room to himself. And one, I went to meet him because he was also writing for Midday.
[Guest]: Oh, right.
[Guest]: So, in those days. So, the two guys sitting in his room were Gundappa Vishwanath,
[Guest]: his brother-in-law, and Dom Morris, who was writing his biography. Now, if you met
[Guest]: both of them, you could, you know, I mean, you can imagine the conversation between Dom Morris
[Guest]: used to speak through clenched teeth in, you know, very accented, heavily accented English.
[Guest]: And Gundappa Vishwanath in his Karnataka, you know, accent. And both of them, you know,
[Guest]: talking to each other. I sat there for half an hour. I couldn't make head or tail of what each
[Guest]: was saying to the other, but they got along like a house on fire. So, and Gavaskar said,
[Guest]: let them be. He went off to sleep because he was batting the next day.
[Amit Varma]: Is it possible for a young journalist today to have the same kind of career you've had?
[Amit Varma]: Because today you will simply not get access to these people.
[Guest]: That's the problem. That's a big problem because the access has become, you know,
[Guest]: the access has now become formalized to the extent that every match you have a player come and give
[Guest]: address the media. You know, that's it. The rest of the access is not easy. And more so now in
[Guest]: today's world where all these players, they are superstars, have their own social media accounts,
[Guest]: which give them millions of people as followers. And they really, I'm talking to my followers.
[Guest]: Why do I need you? And there's some major explanation that has to be given some controversy
[Guest]: or something. It's very difficult to get access to players. And that I think is a challenge.
[Guest]: It's a growing challenge for, you know, people in the media and journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no. And as far as social media is concerned, like one person,
[Guest]: I'm really impressed by is Ashwin, the kind of things he does on YouTube and as a creator.
[Guest]: He's a fascinating character apart from his, the way he has grown as a cricketer and become that
[Guest]: wicket-taking bowler, you know, which at one point in time, it seemed like his, he might be,
[Guest]: you know, career might finish prematurely. And then he's just become stronger and stronger in
[Guest]: his bowling, batting, little cussed about what he wants to do, a little prickly as a personality,
[Guest]: which is also extremely, you know, fascinating. He has a mind of his own. And I think he's also
[Guest]: realized that, you know, he can handle a different portfolio using his cricketing clout or his
[Guest]: persona and his expertise to be in the media, be upfront and facing audience and fellow players.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I think it's absolutely fantastic. No, simply tremendous because combination of
[Amit Varma]: talent, attitude, intelligence, all of these things, which is so rare. Very rarely do you,
[Amit Varma]: you know, find that kind of confluence. Maybe Dravid is an earlier confluence. But what
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin is also doing is, you know, there are two interesting kinds of stardom. One is where you are
[Amit Varma]: larger than life, as our film stars and cricketers have tended to be, where you're worshipped by
[Amit Varma]: people, people may actually literally build temples for you. And the other kind of stardom,
[Amit Varma]: which is a more modern kind of connect that people have with their audiences is more intimate.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Where they feel that they know you, you're talking like them, you're sitting with them.
[Amit Varma]: And I think through his YouTube and through his Twitter, Ashwin kind of approximates that and
[Amit Varma]: therefore actually, you know, kind of manages both in a sense, which is fascinating.
[Guest]: He's doing a marvellous job because he's making the effort to go out and reach out to
[Guest]: an audience, you know. I mean, they may or may not be his fans, but he's reaching out to an
[Guest]: audience which in a different avatar altogether, which is absolutely fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: Mind-blowing. So, you know, I've taken a lot of your time. You've been very generous with me. So,
[Amit Varma]: I'll now ask you for your all-time Indian 11.
[Guest]: My all-time Indian 11. Oh, that's always a tough call. But let's see. Test 11.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, let's go with, let's be purist today. I think T20, it's too early to form judgment
[Guest]: because so much is still happening.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, I would say that Gavaskar, Sehwag, certainly. Tendulkar, number four.
[Guest]: Number five, I would put Kohli.
[Guest]: Three.
[Guest]: Number three would be David. Yeah. Number five, number six, I would put.
[Guest]: Vinu Bhai.
[Guest]: Vinu Bhai. Number seven for me would be Kapil Dev. Number eight, MS Dhoni.
[Amit Varma]: We are identical so far. Carry on.
[Amit Varma]: We are identical?
[Guest]: So far, we are identical.
[Guest]: Zaheer Khan, I would include as another fast bowler. It gets tougher with the spinners because
[Guest]: even Ravindra Jadeja has got a very impressive and interesting record.
[Amit Varma]: Now coming into his own.
[Guest]: Now coming into his own. And also as an all-rounder, there is Ashwin.
[Guest]: How many have we got as yet?
[Amit Varma]: We got to nine with Zaheer. Nine was your Zaheer.
[Guest]: Right. Nine is Zaheer. So, ten would be, I would go with Prasanna.
[Guest]: You know, I would go with Irapalli Prasanna. And 11 would be,
[Guest]: we have already got Zaheer and Kapil. We have to include one more fast bowler.
[Guest]: That's a tough one. I am stuck on this, you know, whether it should be Bumrah.
[Guest]: Though it's very early, you know. Between Bumrah and Srinath is where my needle gets stuck.
[Guest]: But let me see. I will actually go with Bumrah. He has made such a huge impact.
[Guest]: You know, 100 wickets in 24 tests, winning matches overseas.
[Guest]: He has just been But it's a very tough call between him and Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: So, we were the same till number eight. And number nine, I would pick Ashwin over Pras.
[Amit Varma]: And 10 and 11 is a bit of a problem. I would actually just go on faith and go with Bumrah
[Amit Varma]: as my second choice for fast bowler. Because I think he is going to end up as
[Amit Varma]: being considered one of the greats. And 11 would either be Zaheer if I want three fast bowlers.
[Amit Varma]: Or if the match is in Motera or something, then I will just take Kumble.
[Guest]: Yeah. Oh, Kumble. Of course, Kumble. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I am sorry.
[Amit Varma]: So, instead of Prasanna, Kumble.
[Guest]: Instead of Prasanna, Kumble. Yeah. How could I forget Kumble?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. That's so great.
[Guest]: So, you are right. I mean, the choice between the 11th person would depend on the track
[Guest]: where you are playing. So, therefore, the best way is to have a choice of 12 players.
[Amit Varma]: So, you interchange one.
[Guest]: So, we are both happy that way. There is no dilemma.
[Guest]: And see, Kumble also serves the purpose of He can also bat a bit. He has got a test 100.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know.
[Guest]: Ashwin can He is a heck of a batsman.
[Guest]: He has got multiple 100s.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Even Bumrah can be useful.
[Guest]: Yes. And I mean, Kumble has many roles that he can play, including a captain.
[Guest]: You know. So
[Guest]: Who would your coach be?
[Amit Varma]: From those who have been coach of the Indian team?
[Amit Varma]: From those who have been coach, unfortunately. Otherwise, in an ideal world
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, you could just pick Pataudi, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah. Again, very tough call. My choice would be between two Bombay guys.
[Guest]: Ravi Shastri and
[Guest]: And Ajit Wadekar.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Ajit Wadekar was a sterling chap to have.
[Guest]: You know, he is one of those guys who really nursed Sachin Tendulkar.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, from 1992-93.
[Guest]: I think he was And also because he was from Bombay. So, there was an affinity with Wadekar.
[Guest]: But also, a man of great A very genial chap.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: He had his own flavour to him. Spoke He was always trying to crack jokes, which sometimes bombed.
[Guest]: But it didn't deter him. He would crack more jokes to make up for the earlier one.
[Guest]: And then, he would be great fun on a tour or on an assignment.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Ayaaz, one, your book is great. It contains multitudes, as I like to say.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Do I say that about people? It's just I hope everyone picks it up.
[Amit Varma]: Not just because I am fortunate enough to be among some very fine names in
[Amit Varma]: being having a couple of pieces there.
[Amit Varma]: But it's just a wonderful book. Made me so nostalgic and made me feel so warm.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I have not even covered half the questions I had for you, Akeem.
[Amit Varma]: So, we'll have to, you know, save that for another day.
[Amit Varma]: But thank you so much for your time.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit. Thanks for having me here.
[Guest]: And I think it's been absolutely wonderful few hours that we spent together.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Cheers. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.